Ariane 6 (French: ) is a European expendable launch system developed for the European Space Agency (ESA) and French Space Agency (CNES) and manufactured by a consortium of European companies, led by the prime contractor ArianeGroup. As part of the Ariane rocket family, it is operated by Arianespace, replacing the Ariane 5. The project's primary contributors were France (55.3%), Germany (21%) and Italy (7.6%), with the remaining work distributed among ten other participating countries.
This two-stage rocket utilizes liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen (hydrolox) engines. The first stage features an upgraded Vulcain engine from Ariane 5, while the second uses the Vinci engine, designed specifically for this rocket. The Ariane 62 variant uses two P120C solid rocket boosters, while Ariane 64 uses four. The P120C booster is shared with Europe's other launch vehicle, and is an improved version of the P80 used on the original Vega.
Selected in December 2014 over an all-solid-fuel alternative, Ariane 6 was initially planned for a 2020 debut. However, the program faced delays, with the first launch eventually taking place on 9 July 2024. While the rocket successfully launched, the mission experienced a partial failure when the upper stage malfunctioned and was not able to complete its final deorbit burn. The second launch was therefore postponed to 6 March 2025, successfully delivering its first commercial payload to orbit, the CSO-3 reconnaissance satellite.
Ariane 6 was designed to reduce launch costs and increase annual launch capacity from seven to eleven missions compared with its predecessor. As of 2026, the targeted launch rate has not yet been achieved, although when measured by cost per kilogram to orbit, costs have been reduced by 40%. The program has faced criticism over its development costs and lack of reusability compared with competing vehicles such as SpaceX's Falcon 9. European officials have defended the program, stating that it ensures independent access to space for participating member states.

== Description ==
Two variants of Ariane 6 are offered:

Ariane 62 (A62), with two P120C solid boosters, weighs around 530,000 kg (1,170,000 lb) at liftoff and is mainly for government and scientific missions. It can launch up to 4,500 kg (9,900 lb) into geosynchronous transfer orbit (GTO) and 10,350 kg (22,820 lb) into low Earth orbit (LEO). The first launch in July 2024 used this variant.
Ariane 64 (A64), with four P120C boosters, has a liftoff weight of around 860,000 kg (1,900,000 lb) and is intended for commercial dual-satellite launches of up to 11,500 kg (25,400 lb) into GTO and 21,500 kg (47,400 lb) into LEO. Like Ariane 5, it is able to launch two geosynchronous satellites together. The variant was first launched in February 2026.
Rocket components are transported by sea from Europe to the Guiana Space Centre aboard the Canopée, a cargo vessel that uses sails to assist with its propulsion, reducing fuel use.

=== First stage ===
The first (lower) stage of Ariane 6 is called the Lower Liquid Propulsion Module (LLPM). It is powered by a single Vulcain 2.1 engine fuelled by liquid hydrogen (LH2) with liquid oxygen (LOX). The LLPM is 5.4 m (18 ft) in diameter and contains approximately 140 tonnes (310,000 lb) of propellant.

=== Boosters ===
Additional thrust is provided by either two or four P120C model solid rocket boosters, designated in Ariane 6 nomenclature as Equipped Solid Rockets (ESR). Each booster contains approximately 142,000 kilograms (313,000 lb) of propellant and delivers up to 4,650 kN (1,050,000 lbf) of thrust. The P120C is also used as the first stage of the upgraded Vega C launcher, allowing increased production volumes and reduced unit costs through commonality. It is an improved version of the P80 motor used on the original Vega. 
The first full-scale test of the P120C was conducted at Kourou, French Guiana, on 16 July 2018, reaching 4,615 kN (1,037,000 lbf) in vacuum.

=== Second stage ===
The second (upper) stage of Ariane 6 is called the Upper Liquid Propulsion Module (ULPM). It shares the same 5.4 m (18 ft) diameter as the LLPM and is also fuelled by LH2 and LOX. It is powered by the Vinci engine, which delivers 180 kN (40,000 lbf) of thrust, burns for up to 900 seconds and is capable of up to five restarts. The ULPM carries about 32 tonnes (71,000 lb) of propellant and has a dry mass of 6 tonnes.

=== Fairing ===
The payload fairing, constructed by Beyond Gravity from a carbon fibre-polymer composite, is designed as a nose cone that splits vertically into two halves at the top of the Ariane 6 rocket. It is available in two sizes: a long 20-metre (66 ft) version and a short 14-metre (46 ft) version, both with a diameter of 5.4 metres (18 ft). The interior of the cylindrical payload compartment is 4.6 metres (15 ft) in diameter and the long variant measures 11 metres (36 ft) in height, or 18 metres (59 ft) when including the conical portion of the fairing.

== Future upgrades ==

=== ASTRIS ===
The Ariane Smart Transfer and Release In-orbit Ship (ASTRIS) was originally conceived as a kick stage to enable higher orbits for specific payloads. However, it was decided during the November 2025 ESA Council Meeting to evolve ASTRIS into an orbital transfer vehicle.
Designed specifically for the Ariane 6 rocket, it will be an optional add-on to the upper stage and interface directly with the payload. ASTRIS features a steerable main engine that can reignite multiple times to perform orbital changes, and it has six thrusters to perform manoeuvres such as reorienting itself in space along its trajectory.
This will simplify many missions by off-loading some of the required built-in propulsion capabilities of payloads to move themselves to their final orbital position. For example, ASTRIS could enable deep space exploration for ridesharing payloads with destinations such as asteroids, the Moon and Mars; insert a payload directly into geostationary orbit; or augment Ariane 6's ability to deploy multiple payloads such as a constellation into separate low Earth orbits on a single launch.
ASTRIS can also deliver satellites for a small constellation directly into their operational orbits, allowing for the satellites to be smaller and cheaper to build. Ground qualification is expected by the end of 2028, with the inaugural flight in 2029.

=== Block 2 ===
A more powerful "Block 2" version of Ariane 6 is slated to enter service in 2026, featuring enlarged P160C solid rocket boosters and an enhanced Vinci engine in the upper stage with increased thrust of 200 kN (45,000 lbf). These improvements will expand the rocket’s flight envelope and significantly boost its payload capacity, with an expected gain of 2 tonnes (4,400 lb) to low Earth orbit on the Ariane 64. 
Development of the P160C boosters began in 2022. The upgraded boosters are extended by 1 metre (3 ft 3 in) to carry an additional 14 tonnes (31,000 lb) of propellant. Notably, 16 of the 18 planned Amazon Leo launches on Ariane 6 will incorporate this upgraded booster. The first P160C booster casing was built in June 2024, with fuelling and static fire tests anticipated in 2025.
To support these more powerful rockets, CNES is assisting in modifying the existing launch pad. The first Ariane 6 launch with the P160C is planned for Q2 2026 in the Ariane 64 configuration.

=== PHOEBUS ===
An additional Block 3 upgrade is being discussed by the European Space Agency, ArianeGroup and CNES. Increased performance will primarily be achieved via an upgraded upper stage. PHOEBUS (Prototype of a Highly OptimizEd Black Upper Stage) is a program to replace the metal tanks currently used with lighter linerless CFRP tanks for Ariane 6. This  offers the possibility of saving several tonnes of mass, allowing for more payload mass. A full scale liquid oxygen model is being readied for tests in early 2026, while tests with liquid hydrogen will start in April 2026. The impetus for the upgrade is a number of upcoming lunar missions, including the European Argonaut logistics lunar lander project. A decision is expected during the November 2025 European ministerial meeting.

== History ==
Ariane 6 was conceived in the early 2010s to be a replacement launch vehicle for Ariane 5, and a number of concepts and high-level designs were suggested and proposed during 2012–2015. Development funding from several European governments was secured by early 2016, and contracts were signed to begin detailed design and the build of test articles. In 2019, the maiden orbital flight had been planned for 2020, however by May 2020, the planned initial launch date was delayed into 2021. In October 2020, the European Space Agency (ESA) formally requested an additional €230 million in funding from the countries sponsoring the project to complete development of the rocket and get the vehicle to its first test flight, which had slipped to the second quarter of 2022. By June 2021, the date had delayed to late 2022. In June 2022, a delay was announced to "some time in 2023" and by October 2022, ESA clarified that the first launch would be no earlier than the fourth quarter of 2023, while providing no public reason for the delay. In August 2023, ESA announced that the date for the first launch had slipped again to 2024.

=== Concept and early development: 2010–2015 ===

Following detailed definition studies in 2012, ESA announced in July 2013 the selection of the "PPH" (first stage of three P145 rocket motors, second stage of one P145 rocket motor, and H32 cryogenic upper stage) configuration for Ariane 6. It would be capable of launching up to 6,500 kg (14,300 lb) to Geostationary transfer orbit (GTO), with a first flight projected to be as early as 2021–2022. Development was projected to cost €4 billion as of May 2013. A 2014 study concluded that development cost could be reduced to about €3 billion by limiting contractors to five countries.
While Ariane 5 typically launches one large and one medium satellite at a time, the PPH proposal for Ariane 6 was intended for single payloads, with an early 2014 price estimate of approximately US$95 million per launch. The SpaceX Falcon 9 and the Chinese Long March 3B both launch smaller payloads but at lower prices, approximately $57 million and $72 million respectively as of early 2014, making the Falcon 9 launch of a midsize satellite competitive with the cost of the lower slot of a dual payload Ariane 5. For lightweight all-electric satellites, Arianespace intended to use the restartable Vinci engine to deliver the satellites closer to their operational orbit than the Falcon 9 could, thus reducing the time required to transfer to geostationary orbit by several months.

==== Ariane 6.1 and Ariane 6.2 proposals ====
In June 2014, Airbus and Safran surprised ESA by announcing a counter proposal for the Ariane 6 project: a 50/50 joint venture to develop the rocket, which would also involve buying out the French government's CNES interest in Arianespace.
This proposed launch system would come in two variants, Ariane 6.1 and Ariane 6.2. While both would use a cryogenic main stage powered by a Vulcain 2 engine and two P145 solid boosters, Ariane 6.1 would feature a cryogenic upper stage powered by the Vinci engine and boost up to 8,500 kg (18,700 lb) to GTO, while Ariane 6.2 would use a lower-cost hypergolic upper stage powered by the Aestus engine. Ariane 6.1 would have the ability to launch two electrically powered satellites at once, while Ariane 6.2 would be focused on launching government payloads.
French newspaper La Tribune questioned whether Airbus Defence and Space could deliver on the promised costs for their Ariane 6 proposal, and whether Airbus and Safran Group could be trusted when they were found to be responsible for a failure of Ariane 5 flight 517 in 2002 and a more recent 2013 failure of the M51 ballistic missile. The companies were also criticised for being unwilling to incur development risks, and asking for higher initial funding than originally planned – €2.6 billion instead of €2.3 billion. Estimated launch prices of €85 million for Ariane 6.1 and €69 million for Ariane 6.2 did not compare favourably to SpaceX offerings. During the meeting of EU ministers in Geneva on 7 June 2014, these prices were deemed too high and no agreement with manufacturers was reached.

==== Ariane 62 and Ariane 64 proposals ====

Following criticism of the Ariane 6 PPH design, France unveiled a revised Ariane 6 proposal in September 2014. This launcher would use a cryogenic main stage powered by the Vulcain 2 and upper stage powered by the Vinci but vary the number of solid boosters. With two P120C boosters, Ariane 6 would launch up to 5,000 kg (11,000 lb) to GTO at a cost of €75 million. With four boosters, Ariane 6 would be able to launch two satellites totalling 11,000 kg (24,000 lb) to GTO at a cost of €90 million.
This proposal, unlike Ariane 6 PPH, offered a scalable launcher while retaining Ariane 5's dual-launch capability. The proposal also included simplification of the industrial and institutional organisation along with a better and cheaper version of the Vulcain 2 engine for the main stage. Although Ariane 6 was projected to have "lower estimated recurring production costs", it was projected to have "a higher overall development cost owing to the need for a new, Ariane 6-dedicated, launch pad".
The Italian, French, and German space ministers met on 23 September 2014, in order to plan strategy and assess the possibility for agreement on funding for the Ariane 5 successor, and in December 2014, ESA selected the Ariane 62 and Ariane 64 designs for development and funding.
At the 2022 International Astronautical Congress, ArianeGroup announced the proposed "Smart Upper Stage for Innovative Exploration", a reusable upper stage for the 64 (or later) variant, capable of autonomous cargo operations or carrying five astronauts to LEO.

=== Test vehicle development: 2016–2021 ===

In November 2015, an updated design of Ariane 64 and 62 was presented, with new nose cones on the boosters, main stage diameter increased to 5.4 m (18 ft), and the height decreased to 60 m (200 ft).
The basic design for Ariane 6 was finalised in January 2016 as an expendable liquid-fuelled core stage plus expendable solid-rocket-boosters design. Development advanced into detailed design and production phases, with the first major contracts already signed. Unlike previous Ariane rockets, which are assembled and fuelled vertically before being transported to the launchpad, the Ariane 6 main stages were to be assembled horizontally at the new integration hall in Les Mureaux and then transported to French Guiana, to be erected and integrated with boosters and payload.
The horizontal assembly process was inspired by the Russian tradition for Soyuz and Proton launchers – which had more recently been applied to the American Delta IV and Falcon 9 boosters – with a stated goal of halving production costs.
The industrial production process was completely overhauled, allowing synchronized workflow between several European production sites moving at a monthly cadence, which would enable twelve launches per year, doubling Ariane 5's yearly capacity. To further lower the price, Ariane 6 engines were to use 3D printed components.
Reorganisation of the industry behind a new launch vehicle, leading to the creation of Airbus Safran Launchers (ASL), also started a review by the French government into tax matters, and the European Commission over a possible conflict of interest if Airbus Defence and Space, a satellite manufacturer, were to purchase launches from ASL.
While development was initially slated to be substantially complete in 2019, with an initial launch in 2020, the initial launch date has slipped several times: first to 2021, then to 2022, then to 2023, and then to 2024. In October 2022, Arianespace expected the maiden flight to occur in 2023, although in December 2023, Arianespace once again set the flight to occur on 15 June 2024. In June 2024, ESA Executive said its first launch was postponed to July 9th 2024. The maiden flight VA262 took place 9 July 2024 and successfully orbited satellites even though the mission did suffer some problems.

=== Future development options ===

CNES began studies in 2010 on an alternative, reusable first stage for Ariane 6, using a mix of liquid oxygen and liquid methane rather than liquid hydrogen that is used in the 2016 Ariane 6 first-stage design. The methane-powered core could use one or more engines, matching capabilities of Ariane 64 with only two boosters instead of four. As of January 2015, the economic feasibility of reusing an entire stage remained in question. Concurrent with the liquid fly-back booster research in the late 1990s and early 2000s, CNES along with Russia concluded studies indicating that reusing the first stage was economically unviable as manufacturing ten rockets a year was cheaper and more feasible than recovery, refurbishment and loss of performance caused by reusability.
In June 2015, Airbus Defence and Space announced that Adeline, a partially reusable first stage, would become operational between 2025 and 2030 and that it would be developed as a subsequent first stage for Ariane 6. Rather than developing a way to reuse an entire first stage (like SpaceX), Airbus proposed a system where only high-value parts would be safely returned using a winged module at the bottom of the rocket stack.
In August 2016, ASL gave some more details about future development plans building on the Ariane 6 design. CEO Alain Charmeau revealed that Airbus Safran were now working along two main lines: first, continuing work (at the company's own expense) on the recoverable Adeline engine-and-avionics module; and second, beginning development of a next-generation engine to be called Prometheus. This engine would have about the same thrust as the Vulcain 2 currently powering Ariane 5 but would burn methane instead of liquid hydrogen. Charmeau was non-committal about whether Prometheus (still only in the first few months of development) could be used as an expendable replacement for the Vulcain 2 in Ariane 6, or whether it was tied to the re-usable Adeline design, saying only that "We are cautious, and we prefer to speak when are sure of what we announce... But certainly this engine could very well fit with the first stage of Ariane 6 one day", a decision on whether to proceed with Prometheus in an expendable or reusable role could be made between 2025 and 2030. Charmeau was not positive about reusability in 2018, stating that if Ariane had a launch schedule of ten flights per year and had a rocket that could be reused ten times, the company would only build one rocket per year, making supporting an ongoing manufacturing supply chain unviable. Ariane would need 30 launches a year to justify the cost of researching reusability, he said.
In 2017, the Prometheus engine project was revealed to have the aim of reducing the engine unit cost from the €10 million of the Vulcain 2 to €1 million and allowing the engine to be reused up to five times. The engine development is said to be part of a broader effort – codename Ariane NEXT – to reduce Ariane launch costs by a factor of two beyond improvements brought by Ariane 6. The Ariane NEXT initiative includes a reusable sounding rocket, Callisto, to test the performance of various fuels in new engine designs.
The European Space Agency is exploring human-rating certification for Ariane 6, awarding Arianespace a contract to explore potential options for enabling crewed missions to be launched aboard the vehicle.

=== Production ===
In a January 2019 interview, Arianespace CEO Stéphane Israël said that the company would require four more institutional launches for Ariane 6 to sign a manufacturing contract. Launch contracts would be needed for the transitional period of 2020–2023 when Ariane 5 will be phased out and gradually replaced by Ariane 6. The company would require European institutions to become an anchor customer for the launcher. In response, ESA representatives said the agency was working on shifting the 2022 launch of the Jupiter Icy Moons Explorer from Ariane 5 ECA to Ariane 64, further indicating that there are other institutional customers in Europe that must put their weight behind the project, such as the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) or the European Commission.
As of January 2019, Arianespace had sold three flights of the Ariane 6 launch vehicle. One month later, they added a satellite internet constellation launch contract with OneWeb to utilize the maiden launch of Ariane 6 to help populate the large 600-satellite constellation.
On 6 May 2019, Arianespace ordered the first production batch of 14 Ariane 6 rockets. In late 2025, the company ordered long lead time components for 27 more Ariane 6 rockets, enough for launches to 2030.
In 2024, Arianespace expected that their launch tempo would increase to six in 2025, eight in 2026, and stabilize at ten per year starting in 2027.
At the end of 2025, Ariane 6 had more than 30 flights booked (4 years of activity ensured) including 18 launches for the Amazon Leo constellation of satellites. Up to 8 launches are expected for 2026.

== Development funding ==

Ariane 6 was developed in a public-private partnership with the majority of the funding coming from various ESA government sources. As of 2015, the estimated government development cost over the then planned 6-year development phase through 2020 was €2.815 billion of government-provided funds, while €400 million was reported to be "industry's share".  At the time, in a novel approach for ESA, this was to be "an arrangement in which the  company takes full control of Ariane 6 design and development and commits to a firm, fixed-price contract"
By the time the ESA Council approved the project in November 2016, the ESA had already paid out €688 million to Airbus Safran and the ESA Industrial Policy Committee released €1.7 billion of additional funds on 8 November 2016.
In January 2020, two EU institutions, the European Investment Bank and the European Commission, loaned €100 million to Arianespace, drawing from the Horizon 2020 and Investment Plan for Europe corporate investment programmes. The 10-year loan's repayment is tied to the financial success of the Ariane 6 project.

== Launch history ==

=== List of launches ===

=== Planned launches ===

== Criticism ==
The Ariane 6 programme, approved by the ESA in 2012 as a lower-cost successor to Ariane 5, has faced criticism over its development costs, launch price, and lack of reusability. Development extended for more than a decade and was marked by delays and cost overruns. Projected launch prices now exceed €100 million per mission, compared with original estimates of €70 million for the A62 and €90 million for the A64. CNES has stated that the cost-reduction objective has been met, achieving an approximately 40% reduction in cost per kilogram to orbit compared to Ariane 5. Officials have noted that the vehicle's long-term viability in the commercial market will depend on its ability to remain price-competitive against SpaceX's Falcon 9.
A major criticism of the Ariane 6 stems from its reliance on expendable technology at a time when competitors have demonstrated the economic advantages of reusability. For example, SpaceX iteratively developed its Falcon 9 rocket, nearly doubling its payload capacity and making it partially reusable, lowering the company's costs to launch. Some industry experts argued that the decision to forego reusability rendered the Ariane 6 "already obsolete" before it even entered service.
European officials, however, have defended the Ariane 6, citing the strategic necessity for independent access to space. They point to geopolitical disruptions, most notably the loss of access to Russian Soyuz-ST rockets, as evidence that a self-reliant European capability is essential. Officials have also argued that developing a reusable system is unviable at current flight rates.
To support the programme, ESA's member states have agreed to subsidise the Ariane 6 with up to €340 million annually from its 16th to its 42nd flight, expected to occur by 2031. In exchange, governments will receive an 11% discount on launches.

== Notes and references ==

=== Notes ===

=== References ===

== External links ==

Ariane 6 - Official Website
Ariane 6 concept video, Airbus Safran Launchers, November 2016.
Airbus Defence and Space presents Ariane 6 at Paris Air Show 2015

Vulcain is a family of European first stage rocket engines for Ariane 5 and Ariane 6. Its development began in 1988 and the first flight was completed in 1996. The updated version of the engine, Vulcain 2, was first successfully flown in 2005. Both members of the family use liquid oxygen/liquid hydrogen cryogenic fuel. The new version for Ariane 6 is called Vulcain 2.1.

== History ==
The Vulcain rocket engine is named in French for Vulcan, the ancient Roman god of fire. Its development, carried out by a European partnership, began in 1988 with the Ariane 5 rocket program. It first flew in 1996 powering the ill-fated flight 501 without being the cause of the disaster, and had its first successful flight in 1997 (flight 502).
In 2002 the upgraded Vulcain 2 with 20% more thrust first flew on flight 157, although a problem with the engine turned the flight into a failure. The cause was due to flight loads being much higher than expected, as the inquiry board concluded. Subsequently, the nozzle was redesigned to include mechanical reinforcement of the structure and improvement of the thermal situation of the tube wall through enhancing hydrogen coolant flow as well as applying a thermal barrier coating to the flame-facing side of the coolant tubes. The first successful flight of the (partially redesigned) Vulcain 2 occurred in 2005 on flight 521.

=== Further development ===
On 17 June 2007 Volvo Aero announced that in spring of 2008 it expected to hot-fire test a Vulcain 2 nozzle manufactured with a new "sandwich" technology.
The development of the future version for Ariane 6, Vulcain 2.1, began in 2014. First flight-configuration engine nozzle was delivered in June 2017, reducing parts count by 90%, cost by 40% and production time by 30% comparing to the engine nozzle of Vulcain 2. The first launch of Vulcain 2.1 took place on 9 July 2024.

== Overview ==
The Vulcain is a gas-generator cycle rocket engine fed with cryogenic liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. It features regenerative cooling through a tube wall design, and the Vulcain 2 introduced a particular film cooling for the lower part of the nozzle, where exhaust gas from the turbine is re-injected in the engine. It powers the first stage of the Ariane 5 launcher, the EPC (Étage Principal Cryotechnique, main cryogenic stage) and provide 8% of the total lift-off thrust (the rest being provided by the two solid rocket boosters). The engine operating time is 600 s in both configurations. 3 m tall and 1.76 m in diameter, the engine weighs 1686 kg and provides 137 t of thrust in its latest version. The oxygen turbopump rotates at 13600 rpm with a power of 3 MW while the hydrogen turbopump rotates at 34000 rpm with 12 MW of power. The total mass flow rate is 235 kg/s, of which 41.2 kg/s are of hydrogen.

== Contractors ==
The main contractor for the Vulcain engines is Snecma Moteurs (France), which also provides the liquid hydrogen turbopump. The liquid oxygen turbopump is the responsibility of Avio (Italy), and the gas turbines that power the turbopumps and the nozzle are developed by GKN (Formerly Volvo) (Sweden).

== See also ==
Comparison of orbital rocket engines
Spacecraft propulsion
Timeline of hydrogen technologies

=== Comparable engines ===
RS-68
J-2X
RS-25 (SSME)
RD-0120

== References and notes ==

== External links ==

Arianespace – Ariane 5: Cryogenic Main Stage and Solid Boosters
Ariane 5 ECA and Snecma – Snecma Moteurs: Vulcain 2 engine proves its mettle
"LH2 Turbine (Vulcain and Vulcain 2 engines)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 March 2011. – Volvo Aero
"LOX Turbine (Vulcain and Vulcain 2 engines)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 January 2011. – Volvo Aero
"Development of the turbines for the Vulcain 2 turbopumps" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-30. – Volvo Aero
"High cycle fatigue of Vulcain 2 LOx turbine blades" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-27. – Volvo Aero
"An efficient concept design process" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-27. – Volvo Aero
"Vulcain 2 nozzle" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 March 2011. – Volvo Aero

=== Related news ===
EADS N.V. – EADS welcomes contract signature for 30 Ariane 5 launchers at ILA 2004 in Berlin
Three billion Euros contract for 30 Ariane 5 launchers – EADS Astrium

Vinci is a restartable, cryogenic, liquid-propellant rocket engine that powers the upper stage of Ariane 6. While development began in 1998 for the planned Ariane 5ME upgrade, funding for that programme shifted in 2014 to prioritize the development of Ariane 6, making Vinci the engine for the new launcher.

== Overview ==
The Vinci rocket engine is a 180-kilonewton (40,000 lbf) restartable, upper stage cryogenic engine using the expander cycle and fed with liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen. Its biggest improvement over the HM7B engine used on the Ariane 5 is the capability of restarting four times. It is the first European expander cycle engine, removing the need for a gas generator to drive the fuel and oxidizer pumps. The expander cycle was found to be the most promising option to achieve higher reliability, higher performance, multiple ignition capability and low recurring cost.
The engine features a high-performance hydrogen turbopump, an optimized combustion chamber cooling circuit, and cutting-edge manufacturing processes, including powder metallurgy impellers and high-speed cooling channel milling. The combustion chamber body incorporates a smooth-wall design, utilizing the same technology as the HM7B and Vulcain engines, except significantly lengthened.
To enable re-ignition, the Vinci engine is paired with an auxiliary propulsion unit (APU), which performs two important functions. First, the APU can heat up small amounts of propellant inside a 3D-printed gas generator and inject it back into the tanks to re-pressurize them. Secondly, the APU can produce a low level of thrust, to either settle floating propellant in the tanks before re-ignition of the Vinci engine or to make fine orbital adjustments (similar to a thruster). Using the APU reduces overall weight, by eliminating the need to carry a helium tank (the traditional method of re-pressuring propellant tanks).

== Development ==
The preliminary design of Vinci began under the Ariane 5+ program managed by CNES, delegated by ESA. Between 2006 and 2008, engineering and testing were conducted under ESA's Future Launchers Preparatory Programme (FLPP). From 2009 to 2014, Vinci was developed as the upper-stage propulsion system for the next evolution of the upgraded Ariane 5ME (Midlife Evolution) launcher by the space engines division of Safran Aircraft Engines. However, funding for the Ariane 5ME programme was cut in 2014 in favour of developing Ariane 6.
By the end of 2014, Vinci successfully completed its critical design review (CDR), following successful CDRs for its major subsystems (combustion chamber, fuel and oxygen turbopumps) throughout the latter half of the year.
In July 2017, the newly-formed Ariane Group, a joint venture between Airbus and Safran, reported that the first flight models of the combustion chamber had entered production.
In October 2018, Ariane Group announced that qualification tests had been completed, proving the engine and upper stage were capable of operating for at least 900 seconds and four burns. The company said that during tests to push the engine beyond its operational requirements, it had successfully fired the engine 20 times during a single test of 300 seconds and, in another test, had fired the engine for a total duration of 1,569 seconds.
The first flight of the Ariane 6 rocket with Vinci took place on 9 July 2024. The engine worked normally during the initial launch and a brief second burn. However, it failed to restart for a third burn due to an anomaly with its auxiliary propulsion unit, precluding a deorbit burn.

== See also ==
Spacecraft propulsion
M10 (rocket engine)

=== Comparable engines ===
RL10
RL60
HM7B
YF-75D
RD-0146
LE-5B-2
CE-20

== References ==

== External links ==
ESA news 2005-05-20: Vinci engine hot-firing test a success
ESA news 2005-06-14: Testing the new Vinci engine
ESA news 2005-07-29: Thumbs up for 60-second firing
ESA news 2005-11-07: Second Vinci engine ready for testing

Spacecraft propulsion is any method used to accelerate spacecraft and artificial satellites. In-space propulsion exclusively deals with propulsion systems used in the vacuum of space and should not be confused with space launch or atmospheric entry.
Several methods of pragmatic spacecraft propulsion have been developed, each having its own drawbacks and advantages. Most satellites have simple reliable chemical thrusters (often monopropellant rockets) or resistojet rockets for orbital station-keeping, while a few use momentum wheels for attitude control. Russian and antecedent Soviet bloc satellites have used electric propulsion for decades, and newer Western geo-orbiting spacecraft are starting to use them for north–south station-keeping and orbit raising. Interplanetary vehicles mostly use chemical rockets as well, although a few have used electric propulsion such as ion thrusters and Hall-effect thrusters. Various technologies need to support everything from small satellites and robotic deep space exploration to space stations and human missions to Mars.
Hypothetical in-space propulsion technologies describe propulsion technologies that could meet future space science and exploration needs. These propulsion technologies are intended to provide effective exploration of the Solar System and may permit mission designers to plan missions to "fly anytime, anywhere, and complete a host of science objectives at the destinations" and with greater reliability and safety. With a wide range of possible missions and candidate propulsion technologies, the question of which technologies are "best" for future missions is a difficult one; expert opinion now holds that a portfolio of propulsion technologies should be developed to provide optimum solutions for a diverse set of missions and destinations.

== Purpose and function ==

The primary goals of space exploration are to reach the destination safely, quickly, with a large quantity of payload mass, and relatively inexpensively. The act of reaching the destination requires an in-space propulsion system, and the other metrics are modifiers to this fundamental action. Propulsion technologies can significantly improve a number of critical aspects of the mission.
When launching a spacecraft from Earth, a propulsion method must overcome a higher gravitational pull to provide a positive net acceleration. When in space, the purpose of a propulsion system is to change the velocity, or v, of a spacecraft, in order to establish the desired trajectory.
In-space propulsion begins where the upper stage of the launch vehicle leaves off, performing the functions of primary propulsion, reaction control, station keeping, precision pointing, and orbital maneuvering. The main engines used in space provide the primary propulsive force for orbit transfer, planetary trajectories, and extra planetary landing and ascent. The reaction control and orbital maneuvering systems provide the propulsive force for orbit maintenance, position control, station keeping, and spacecraft attitude control.
In orbit, any additional impulse, even tiny, will result in a change in the orbit path, in three ways, corresponding to the three dimensions of space:

Prograde/retrograde (i.e. acceleration in the tangential/opposite in tangential direction), which increases/decreases altitude of orbit.
Perpendicular to orbital plane, which changes orbital inclination.
Radially, i.e. towards or away from the body being orbited, which alters the eccentricity of the orbit.
Earth's surface is situated fairly deep in a gravity well; the escape velocity required to leave its orbit is 11.2 kilometers per second. Thus for destinations beyond, propulsion systems need enough propellant and to be of high enough efficiency. The same is true for other planets and moons, albeit some have lower gravity wells.
As human beings evolved in a gravitational field of "one g" (9.81 m/s2), it would be most comfortable for a human spaceflight propulsion system to provide that acceleration continuously (though human bodies can tolerate much larger accelerations over short periods). The occupants of a rocket or spaceship having such a propulsion system would be free from the ill effects of free fall, such as nausea, muscular weakness, reduced sense of taste, or leaching of calcium from their bones.

== Theory ==
The Tsiolkovsky rocket equation shows, using the law of conservation of momentum, that for a rocket engine propulsion method to change the momentum of a spacecraft, it must change the momentum of something else in the opposite direction. In other words, the rocket must exhaust mass opposite the spacecraft's acceleration direction, with such exhausted mass called propellant or reaction mass. For this to happen, both reaction mass and energy are needed. The impulse provided by launching a particle of reaction mass with mass m at velocity v is mv. But (following Newton's second law of motion) this particle has kinetic energy ⁠1/2⁠mv2, which must come from somewhere. In a conventional solid, liquid, or hybrid rocket, fuel is burned, providing the energy, and the reaction products are allowed to flow out of the engine nozzle, providing the reaction mass. In an ion thruster, electricity is used to accelerate ions behind the spacecraft. Here other sources must provide the electrical energy (e.g. a solar panel or a nuclear reactor), whereas the ions provide the reaction mass.
The rate of change of velocity is called acceleration and the rate of change of momentum is called force. To reach a given velocity, one can apply a small acceleration over a long period of time, or a large acceleration over a short time; similarly, one can achieve a given impulse with a large force over a short time or a small force over a long time. This means that for maneuvering in space, a propulsion method that produces tiny accelerations for a long time can often produce the same impulse as another which produces large accelerations for a short time. However, when launching from a planet, tiny accelerations cannot overcome the planet's gravitational pull and so cannot be used.
Some designs however, operate without internal reaction mass by taking advantage of magnetic fields or light pressure to change the spacecraft's momentum.

=== Efficiency ===
When discussing the efficiency of a propulsion system, designers often focus on the effective use of the reaction mass, which must be carried along with the rocket and is irretrievably consumed when used. Spacecraft performance can be quantified in amount of change in momentum per unit of propellant consumed, also called specific impulse. This is a measure of the amount of impulse that can be obtained from a fixed amount of reaction mass. The higher the specific impulse, the better the efficiency. Ion propulsion engines have high specific impulse (~3000 s) and low thrust whereas chemical rockets like monopropellant or bipropellant rocket engines have a low specific impulse (~300 s) but high thrust.
The impulse per unit weight-on-Earth (typically designated by 

          I

            sp

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}}

) has units of seconds. Because the weight on Earth of the reaction mass is often unimportant when discussing vehicles in space, specific impulse can also be discussed in terms of impulse per unit mass, with the same units as velocity (e.g., meters per second). This measure is equivalent to the effective exhaust velocity of the engine, and is typically designated 

          v

            e

    {\displaystyle v_{e}}

. Either the change in momentum per unit of propellant used by a spacecraft, or the velocity of the propellant exiting the spacecraft, can be used to measure its specific impulse. The two values differ by a factor of the standard acceleration due to gravity, gn, 9.80665 m/s² (

          I

            sp

          g

              n

        =

          v

            e

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}g_{\mathrm {n} }=v_{e}}

).
In contrast to chemical rockets, electrodynamic rockets use
electric or magnetic fields to accelerate a charged propellant. The benefit of this method is that it can achieve exhaust velocities, and therefore 

          I

            sp

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}}

, more than 10 times greater than those of a chemical engine, producing steady thrust with far less fuel. With a conventional chemical propulsion system, 2% of a rocket's total mass might make it to the destination, with the other 98% having been consumed as fuel. With an electric propulsion system, 70% of what is aboard in low Earth orbit can make it to a deep-space destination.
However, there is a trade-off. Chemical rockets transform  propellants into most of the energy needed to propel them, but their electromagnetic equivalents must carry or produce the power required to create and accelerate propellants. Because there are currently practical limits on the amount of power available on a spacecraft, these engines are not suitable for launch vehicles or when a spacecraft needs a quick, large impulse, such as when it brakes to enter a capture orbit. Even so, because electrodynamic rockets offer very high 

          I

            sp

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}}

, mission planners are increasingly willing to sacrifice power and thrust (and the extra time it will take to get a spacecraft where it needs to go) in order to save large amounts of propellant mass.

== Operating domains ==
Spacecraft operate in many areas of space. These include orbital maneuvering, interplanetary travel, and interstellar travel.

=== Orbital ===

Artificial satellites are first launched into the desired altitude by conventional liquid/solid propelled rockets, after which the satellite may use onboard propulsion systems for orbital stationkeeping. Once in the desired orbit, they often need some form of attitude control so that they are correctly pointed with respect to the Earth, the Sun, and possibly some astronomical object of interest. They are also subject to drag from the thin atmosphere, so that to stay in orbit for a long period of time some form of propulsion is occasionally necessary to make small corrections (orbital station-keeping). Many satellites need to be moved from one orbit to another from time to time, and this also requires propulsion. A satellite's useful life is usually over once it has exhausted its ability to adjust its orbit.

=== Interplanetary ===

For interplanetary travel, a spacecraft can use its engines to leave Earth's orbit. It is not explicitly necessary as the initial boost given by the rocket, gravity slingshot, monopropellant/bipropellent attitude control propulsion system are enough for the exploration of the solar system (see New Horizons). Once it has done so, it must make its way to its destination. Current interplanetary spacecraft do this with a series of short-term trajectory adjustments. In between these adjustments, the spacecraft typically moves along its trajectory without accelerating. The most fuel-efficient means to move from one circular orbit to another is with a Hohmann transfer orbit: the spacecraft begins in a roughly circular orbit around the Sun. A short period of thrust in the direction of motion accelerates or decelerates the spacecraft into an elliptical orbit around the Sun which is tangential to its previous orbit and also to the orbit of its destination. The spacecraft falls freely along this elliptical orbit until it reaches its destination, where another short period of thrust accelerates or decelerates it to match the orbit of its destination. Special methods such as aerobraking or aerocapture are sometimes used for this final orbital adjustment.

Some spacecraft propulsion methods such as solar sails provide very low but inexhaustible thrust; an interplanetary vehicle using one of these methods would follow a rather different trajectory, either constantly thrusting against its direction of motion in order to decrease its distance from the Sun, or constantly thrusting along its direction of motion to increase its distance from the Sun. The concept has been successfully tested by the Japanese IKAROS solar sail spacecraft.

=== Interstellar ===

Because interstellar distances are great, a tremendous velocity is needed to get a spacecraft to its destination in a reasonable amount of time. Acquiring such a velocity on launch and getting rid of it on arrival remains a formidable challenge for spacecraft designers. No spacecraft capable of short duration (compared to human lifetime) interstellar travel has yet been built, but many hypothetical designs have been discussed.

== Propulsion technology ==
Spacecraft propulsion technology can be of several types, such as chemical, electric or nuclear. They are distinguished based on the physics of the propulsion system and how thrust is generated. Other experimental and more theoretical types are also included, depending on their technical maturity. Additionally, there may be credible meritorious in-space propulsion concepts not foreseen or reviewed at the time of publication, and which may be shown to be beneficial to future mission applications.
Almost all types are reaction engines, which produce thrust by expelling reaction mass, in accordance with Newton's third law of motion. Examples include jet engines, rocket engines, pump-jet, and more uncommon variations such as Hall–effect thrusters, ion drives, mass drivers, and nuclear pulse propulsion.

=== Chemical propulsion ===

A large fraction of rocket engines in use today are chemical rockets; that is, they obtain the energy needed to generate thrust by chemical reactions to create a hot gas that is expanded to produce thrust. Many different propellant combinations are used to obtain these chemical reactions, including, for example, hydrazine, liquid oxygen, liquid hydrogen, nitrous oxide, and hydrogen peroxide. They can be used as a monopropellant or in bi-propellant configurations.
Rocket engines provide essentially the highest specific powers and high specific thrusts of any engine used for spacecraft propulsion. Most rocket engines are internal combustion heat engines (although non-combusting forms exist). Rocket engines generally produce a high-temperature reaction mass, as a hot gas, which is achieved by combusting a solid, liquid or gaseous fuel with an oxidiser within a combustion chamber. The extremely hot gas is then allowed to escape through a high-expansion ratio bell-shaped nozzle, a feature that gives a rocket engine its characteristic shape. The effect of the nozzle is to accelerate the mass, converting most of the thermal energy into kinetic energy, where exhaust speeds reaching as high as 10 times the speed of sound at sea level are common.

==== Green chemical propulsion ====
The dominant form of chemical propulsion for satellites has historically been hydrazine, but this fuel is highly toxic and at risk of being banned across Europe. Non-toxic 'green' alternatives are now being developed to replace hydrazine. Nitrous oxide-based alternatives are garnering traction and government support, with development being led by commercial companies Dawn Aerospace, Impulse Space, and Launcher. The first nitrous oxide-based system flown in space was by D-Orbit onboard their ION Satellite Carrier (space tug) in 2021, using six Dawn Aerospace B20 thrusters, launched upon a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket.

=== Electric propulsion ===

Rather than relying on high temperature and fluid dynamics to accelerate the reaction mass to high speeds, there are a variety of methods that use electrostatic or electromagnetic forces to accelerate the reaction mass directly, where the reaction mass is usually a stream of ions.
Ion propulsion rockets typically heat a plasma or charged gas inside a magnetic bottle and release it via a magnetic nozzle so that no solid matter needs to come in contact with the plasma. Such an engine uses electric power, first to ionize atoms, and then to create a voltage gradient to accelerate the ions to high exhaust velocities. For these drives, at the highest exhaust speeds, energetic efficiency and thrust are all inversely proportional to exhaust velocity. Their very high exhaust velocity means they require huge amounts of energy and thus with practical power sources provide low thrust, but use hardly any fuel.
Electric propulsion is commonly used for station keeping on commercial communications satellites and for prime propulsion on some scientific space missions because of their high specific impulse. However, they generally have very small values of thrust and therefore must be operated for long durations to provide the total impulse required by a mission.
The idea of electric propulsion dates to 1906, when Robert Goddard considered the possibility in his personal notebook. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky published the idea in 1911.
Electric propulsion methods include:

Ion thrusters, which accelerate ions first and later neutralize the ion beam with an electron stream emitted from a cathode called a neutralizer:
Electrostatic ion thrusters
Field-emission electric propulsion
MagBeam thrusters
Hall-effect thrusters
Colloid thrusters
Electrothermal thrusters, wherein electromagnetic fields are used to generate a plasma to increase the heat of the bulk propellant, and the thermal energy imparted to the propellant gas is then converted into kinetic energy by a nozzle of either physical material construction or by magnetic means:
Arcjets using DC current or microwaves
Helicon double-layer thrusters
Resistojets
Electromagnetic thrusters, wherein ions are accelerated either by the Lorentz force or by the effect of electromagnetic fields where the electric field is not in the direction of the acceleration:
Plasma propulsion engines
Magnetoplasmadynamic thrusters
Electrodeless plasma thrusters
Pulsed inductive thrusters
Pulsed plasma thrusters
Variable specific impulse magnetoplasma rockets (VASIMR)
Vacuum arc thrusters
Mass drivers designed for propulsion.

==== Power sources ====
For some missions, particularly reasonably close to the Sun, solar energy may be sufficient, and has often been used, but for others further out or at higher power, nuclear energy is necessary; engines drawing their power from a nuclear source are called nuclear electric rockets.
Current nuclear power generators are approximately half the weight of solar panels per watt of energy supplied, at terrestrial distances from the Sun. Chemical power generators are not used due to the far lower total available energy. Beamed power to the spacecraft is considered to have potential, according to NASA and the University of Colorado Boulder.
With any current source of electrical power, chemical, nuclear or solar, the maximum amount of power that can be generated limits the amount of thrust that can be produced to a small value. Power generation adds significant mass to the spacecraft, and ultimately the weight of the power source limits the performance of the vehicle.

=== Nuclear propulsion ===

Nuclear fuels typically have very high specific energy, much higher than chemical fuels, which means that they can generate large amounts of energy per unit mass. This makes them valuable in spaceflight, as it can enable high specific impulses, sometimes even at high thrusts. The machinery to do this is complex, but research has developed methods for their use in propulsion systems, and some have been tested in a laboratory.
Here, nuclear propulsion moreso refers to the source of propulsion being nuclear, instead of a nuclear electric rocket where a nuclear reactor would provide power (instead of solar panels) for other types of electrical propulsion.
Nuclear propulsion methods include:

Fission-fragment rockets
Fission sails
Fusion rockets
Nuclear thermal rockets (NTR)
Nuclear pulse propulsion
Nuclear salt-water rockets
Radioisotope rockets

=== Field propulsion without internal reaction mass ===

There are several different space drives that need little or no reaction mass to function. Field propulsion refers to propulsion systems in which thrust arises from interactions with external fields or ambient media, rather than from the sustained expulsion of onboard reaction mass or reliance on solid chemical fuels.

==== Solar and magnetic sails ====

The concept of solar sails rely on radiation pressure from electromagnetic energy, but they require a large collection surface to function effectively. E-sails propose to use very thin and lightweight wires holding an electric charge to deflect particles, which may have more controllable directionality.
Magnetic sails deflect charged particles from the solar wind with a magnetic field, thereby imparting momentum to the spacecraft. For instance, the so-called Magsail is a large superconducting loop proposed for acceleration/deceleration in the solar wind and deceleration in the Interstellar medium. A variant is the mini-magnetospheric plasma propulsion system and its successor, the magnetoplasma sail, which inject plasma at a low rate to enhance the magnetic field to more effectively deflect charged particles in a plasma wind.
Japan launched a solar sail-powered spacecraft, IKAROS in May 2010, which successfully demonstrated propulsion and guidance (and is still active as of this date). As further proof of the solar sail concept, NanoSail-D became the first such powered satellite to orbit Earth. As of August 2017, NASA confirmed the Sunjammer solar sail project was concluded in 2014 with lessons learned for future space sail projects. The U.K. Cubesail programme will be the first mission to demonstrate solar sailing in low Earth orbit, and the first mission to demonstrate full three-axis attitude control of a solar sail.

==== Other ====
The concept of a gravitational slingshot is a form of propulsion to carry a space probe onward to other destinations without the expense of reaction mass; harnessing the gravitational energy of other celestial objects allows the spacecraft to gain kinetic energy. However, more energy can be obtained from the gravity assist if rockets are used via the Oberth effect.
A tether propulsion system employs a long cable with a high tensile strength to change a spacecraft's orbit, such as by interaction with a planet's magnetic field or through momentum exchange with another object.
Beam-powered propulsion is another method of propulsion without reaction mass, and includes sails pushed by laser, microwave, or particle beams.

=== Other propulsion types ===
Many spacecraft use reaction wheels or control moment gyroscopes to control orientation in space. A satellite or other space vehicle is subject to the law of conservation of angular momentum, which constrains a body from a net change in angular velocity. Thus, for a vehicle to change its relative orientation without expending reaction mass, another part of the vehicle may rotate in the opposite direction. Non-conservative external forces, primarily gravitational and atmospheric, can contribute up to several degrees per day to angular momentum, so such systems are designed to "bleed off" undesired rotational energies built up over time.

=== Advanced propulsion technology ===
Advanced, and in some cases theoretical, propulsion technologies may use chemical or nonchemical physics to produce thrust but are generally considered to be of lower technical maturity with challenges that have not been overcome. For both human and robotic exploration, traversing the solar system is a struggle against time and distance. The most distant planets are 4.5–6 billion kilometers from the Sun and to reach them in any reasonable time requires much more capable propulsion systems than conventional chemical rockets. Rapid inner solar system missions with flexible launch dates are difficult, requiring propulsion systems that are beyond today's current state of the art. The logistics, and therefore the total system mass required to support sustained human exploration beyond Earth to destinations such as the Moon, Mars, or near-Earth objects, are daunting unless more efficient in-space propulsion technologies are developed and fielded.

A variety of hypothetical propulsion techniques have been considered that require a deeper understanding of the properties of space, particularly inertial frames and the vacuum state. Such methods are highly speculative and include:
A NASA assessment of its Breakthrough Propulsion Physics Program divides such proposals into those that are non-viable for propulsion purposes, those that are of uncertain potential, and those that are not impossible according to current theories.

=== Table of methods ===

Below is a summary of some of the more popular, proven technologies, followed by increasingly speculative methods. Four numbers are shown. The first is the effective exhaust velocity: the equivalent speed which the propellant leaves the vehicle. This is not necessarily the most important characteristic of the propulsion method; thrust and power consumption and other factors can be. However,

if the delta-v is much more than the exhaust velocity, then exorbitant amounts of fuel are necessary (see the section on calculations, above), and
if it is much more than the delta-v, then, proportionally more energy is needed; if the power is limited, as with solar energy, this means that the journey takes a proportionally longer time.
The second and third are the typical amounts of thrust and the typical burn times of the method; outside a gravitational potential, small amounts of thrust applied over a long period will give the same effect as large amounts of thrust over a short period, if the object is not significantly influenced by gravity. The fourth is the maximum delta-v the technique can give without staging. For rocket-like propulsion systems, this is a function of mass fraction and exhaust velocity; mass fraction for rocket-like systems is usually limited by propulsion system weight and tankage weight. For a system to achieve this limit, the payload may need to be a negligible percentage of the vehicle, and so the practical limit on some systems can be much lower.

Table Notes

== Planetary and atmospheric propulsion ==

=== Launch-assist mechanisms ===

There have been many ideas proposed for launch-assist mechanisms that have the potential of substantially reducing the cost of getting to orbit. Proposed non-rocket spacelaunch launch-assist mechanisms include:

Skyhook (requires reusable suborbital launch vehicle, not feasible using presently available materials)
Space elevator (tether from Earth's surface to geostationary orbit, cannot be built with existing materials)
Launch loop (a very fast enclosed rotating loop about 80 km tall)
Space fountain (a very tall building held up by a stream of masses fired from its base)
Orbital ring (a ring around Earth with spokes hanging down off bearings)
Electromagnetic catapult (railgun, coilgun) (an electric gun)
Rocket sled launch
Space gun (Project HARP, ram accelerator) (a chemically powered gun)
Beam-powered propulsion rockets and jets powered from the ground via a beam
High-altitude platforms to assist initial stage

=== Air-breathing engines ===

Studies generally show that conventional air-breathing engines, such as ramjets or turbojets are basically too heavy (have too low a thrust/weight ratio) to give significant performance improvement when installed on a launch vehicle. However, launch vehicles can be air launched from separate lift vehicles (e.g. B-29, Pegasus Rocket and White Knight) which do use such propulsion systems. Jet engines mounted on a launch rail could also be so used.
On the other hand, very lightweight or very high-speed engines have been proposed that take advantage of the air during ascent:

SABRE – a lightweight hydrogen fuelled turbojet with precooler
ATREX – a lightweight hydrogen fuelled turbojet with precooler
Liquid air cycle engine – a hydrogen-fuelled jet engine that liquifies the air before burning it in a rocket engine
Scramjet – jet engines that use supersonic combustion
Shcramjet – similar to a scramjet engine, however it takes advantage of shockwaves produced from the aircraft in the combustion chamber to assist in increasing overall efficiency.
Normal rocket launch vehicles fly almost vertically before rolling over at an altitude of some tens of kilometers before burning sideways for orbit; this initial vertical climb wastes propellant but is optimal as it greatly reduces airdrag. Airbreathing engines burn propellant much more efficiently and this would permit a far flatter launch trajectory. The vehicles would typically fly approximately tangentially to Earth's surface until leaving the atmosphere then perform a rocket burn to bridge the final delta-v to orbital velocity.
For spacecraft already in very low-orbit, air-breathing electric propulsion could use residual gases in the upper atmosphere as a propellant. Air-breathing electric propulsion could make a new class of long-lived, low-orbiting missions feasible on Earth, Mars or Venus.

=== Planetary arrival and landing ===

When a vehicle is to enter orbit around its destination planet, or when it is to land, it must adjust its velocity. This can be done using any of the methods listed above (provided they can generate a high enough thrust), but there are methods that can take advantage of planetary atmospheres and/or surfaces.

Aerobraking allows a spacecraft to reduce the high point of an elliptical orbit by repeated brushes with the atmosphere at the low point of the orbit. This can save a considerable amount of fuel because it takes much less delta-V to enter an elliptical orbit compared to a low circular orbit. Because the braking is done over the course of many orbits, heating is comparatively minor, and a heat shield is not required. This has been done on several Mars missions such as Mars Global Surveyor, 2001 Mars Odyssey, and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, and at least one Venus mission, Magellan.
Aerocapture is a much more aggressive manoeuver, converting an incoming hyperbolic orbit to an elliptical orbit in one pass. This requires a heat shield and more controlled navigation because it must be completed in one pass through the atmosphere, and unlike aerobraking no preview of the atmosphere is possible. If the intent is to remain in orbit, then at least one more propulsive maneuver is required after aerocapture—otherwise the low point of the resulting orbit will remain in the atmosphere, resulting in eventual re-entry. Aerocapture has not yet been tried on a planetary mission, but the re-entry skip by Zond 6 and Zond 7 upon lunar return were aerocapture maneuvers, because they turned a hyperbolic orbit into an elliptical orbit. On these missions, because there was no attempt to raise the perigee after the aerocapture, the resulting orbit still intersected the atmosphere, and re-entry occurred at the next perigee.
A ballute is an inflatable drag device.
Parachutes can land a probe on a planet or moon with an atmosphere, usually after the atmosphere has scrubbed off most of the velocity, using a heat shield.
Airbags can soften the final landing.
Lithobraking, or stopping by impacting the surface, is usually done by accident. However, it may be done deliberately with the probe expected to survive (see, for example, the Deep Impact spacecraft), in which case very sturdy probes are required.

== Research ==
Development of technologies will result in technical solutions that improve thrust levels, specific impulse, power, specific mass, (or specific power), volume, system mass, system complexity, operational complexity, commonality with other spacecraft systems, manufacturability, durability, and cost. These types of improvements will yield decreased transit times, increased payload mass, safer spacecraft, and decreased costs. In some instances, the development of technologies within this technology area will result in mission-enabling breakthroughs that will revolutionize space exploration. There is no single propulsion technology that will benefit all missions or mission types; the requirements for in-space propulsion vary widely according to their intended application.
One institution focused on developing primary propulsion technologies aimed at benefitting near- and mid-term science missions by reducing cost, mass, and/or travel times is the Glenn Research Center (GRC). Electric propulsion architectures are of particular interest to the GRC, including ion and Hall thrusters. One system combines solar sails, a form of propellantless propulsion which relies on naturally occurring starlight for propulsion energy, and Hall thrusters. Other propulsion technologies being developed include advanced chemical propulsion and aerocapture.

Sustainable Propulsion technologies, such as solar cells and electric propulsion systems powered by renewable energy, are gaining attention for their potential to provide solutions for space travel, whilst aiming for more efficient energy sources and lesser harmful emissions. However, those technologies may be limited in terms of thrust and scalability.
In 2023, Boeing and Airbus are the leading research companies in Sustainable Propulsion for space applications in terms of patent family publications, but mostly focus on hydrogen/fuel cells and sustainable fuels. The most important area in terms of patent family publications is electric propulsion. The number of patent family publications in electric propulsion systems has increased from only 70 in 2000 to 293 in 2023, with the top inventors being from China. 

=== Defining technologies ===
The term "mission pull" defines a technology or a performance characteristic necessary to meet a planned NASA mission requirement. Any other relationship between a technology and a mission (an alternate propulsion system, for example) is categorized as "technology push." Also, a space demonstration refers to the spaceflight of a scaled version of a particular technology or of a critical technology subsystem. On the other hand, a space validation would serve as a qualification flight for future mission implementation. A successful validation flight would not require any additional space testing of a particular technology before it can be adopted for a science or exploration mission.

=== Testing ===
Spacecraft propulsion systems are often first statically tested on Earth's surface, within the atmosphere but many systems require a vacuum chamber to test fully. Rockets are usually tested at a rocket engine test facility well away from habitation and other buildings for safety reasons. Ion drives are far less dangerous and require much less stringent safety, usually only a moderately large vacuum chamber is needed. Static firing of engines are done at ground test facilities, and systems which cannot be adequately tested on the ground and require launches may be employed at a launch site.

== In fiction ==

In science fiction, space ships use various means to travel, some of them scientifically plausible (like solar sails or ramjets), others, mostly or entirely fictitious (like anti-gravity, warp drive, spindizzy or hyperspace travel).

== Further reading ==

Heister, Stephen D.; Anderson, William E.; Pourpoint, Timothée L.; Cassady, R. Joseph (2019). Rocket Propulsion. Cambridge Aerospace Series. Vol. 47. Cambridge England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-108-39506-9. Retrieved 22 July 2023.
Musielak, Dora (2025). Introduction to Rocket Propulsion for Astronautics. Synthesis Lectures on Engineering, Science, and Technology. Springer Cham. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-86141-3. ISBN 978-3-031-86141-3.
Sutton, George P.; Biblarz, Oscar (2016). Rocket Propulsion Elements (9th ed.). New York, New York: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-118-75365-1. Retrieved 22 July 2023.
Taploo, A; Lin, Li; Keidar, Michael (1 September 2021). "Analysis of Ionization in Air-Breathing Plasma Thruster". Physics of Plasmas. 28 (9): 093505. Bibcode:2021PhPl...28i3505T. doi:10.1063/5.0059896. S2CID 240531647. See also: Taploo, A; Lin, Li; Keidar, Michael (2022). "Air Ionization in Self-Neutralizing Air-Breathing Plasma Thruster". J. Electr. Propuls. 1 (1): 25. Bibcode:2022JElP....1...25T. doi:10.1007/s44205-022-00022-x. S2CID 253556114.
Taploo A, Soni V, Solomon H, McCraw M, Lin L, Spinelli J, Shepard S, Solares S, Keidar M (12 October 2023). "Characterization of a circular arc electron source for a self-neutralizing air-breathing plasma thruster". Journal of Electric Propulsion. 2 (21) 21. Bibcode:2023JElP....2...21T. doi:10.1007/s44205-023-00058-7.

== See also ==

== References ==

== External links ==
NASA Breakthrough Propulsion Physics project
Different Rockets Archived 2010-05-29 at the Wayback Machine
Earth-to-Orbit Transportation Bibliography Archived 2016-06-15 at the Wayback Machine
Spaceflight Propulsion – a detailed survey by Greg Goebel, in the public domain
Johns Hopkins University, Chemical Propulsion Information Analysis Center
Tool for Liquid Rocket Engine Thermodynamic Analysis
Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum's How Things Fly website
Fullerton, Richard K. "Advanced EVA Roadmaps and Requirements Archived 2020-09-24 at the Wayback Machine." Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Environmental Systems. 2001.
Atomic Rocket – Engines: A site listing and detailing real, theoretical and fantasy space engines.

Orbital mechanics or astrodynamics is the application of ballistics and celestial mechanics to rockets, satellites, and other spacecraft. The motion of these objects is usually calculated from laws of motion and of universal gravitation derived by Isaac Newton. Astrodynamics is a core discipline within space-mission design and control.
Celestial mechanics treats more broadly the orbit dynamics of systems under the influence of gravity, including both spacecraft and natural astronomical bodies such as star systems, planets, moons, and comets. Orbital mechanics focuses on spacecraft trajectories, including orbital maneuvers, orbital plane changes, and interplanetary transfers, and is used by mission planners to predict the results of propulsive maneuvers.
General relativity is a more exact theory than Newton's laws for calculating orbits, and it is sometimes necessary to use it for greater accuracy or in high-gravity situations (e.g. orbits near the Sun).

== History ==
Until the rise of space travel in the twentieth century, there was little distinction between orbital and celestial mechanics. At the time of Sputnik, the field was termed 'space dynamics'. The fundamental techniques, such as those used to solve the Keplerian problem (determining position as a function of time), are therefore the same in both fields. Furthermore, the history of the fields is almost entirely shared.
Johannes Kepler was the first to successfully model planetary orbits to a high degree of accuracy, publishing his laws in 1609. Isaac Newton published more general laws of celestial motion in the first edition of Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica (1687), which gave a method for finding the orbit of a body following a parabolic path from three observations. This was used by Edmund Halley to establish the orbits of various comets, including that which bears his name. Newton's method of successive approximation was formalised into an analytic method by Leonhard Euler in 1744, whose work was in turn generalised to elliptical and hyperbolic orbits by Johann Lambert in 1761–1777.
Another milestone in orbit determination was Carl Friedrich Gauss's assistance in the "recovery" of the dwarf planet Ceres in 1801. Gauss's method was able to use just three observations (in the form of pairs of right ascension and declination), to find the six orbital elements that completely describe an orbit. The theory of orbit determination has subsequently been developed to the point where today it is applied in GPS receivers as well as the tracking and cataloguing of newly observed minor planets. Modern orbit determination and prediction are used to operate all types of satellites and space probes, as it is necessary to know their future positions to a high degree of accuracy.
Astrodynamics was developed by astronomer Samuel Herrick beginning in the 1930s. He consulted the rocket scientist Robert Goddard and was encouraged to continue his work on space navigation techniques, as Goddard believed they would be needed in the future. Numerical techniques of astrodynamics were coupled with new powerful computers in the 1960s, and humans were ready to travel to the Moon and return.

== Practical techniques ==

=== Rules of thumb ===
The following rules of thumb are useful for situations approximated by classical mechanics under the standard assumptions of astrodynamics outlined below. The specific example discussed is of a satellite orbiting a planet, but the rules of thumb could also apply to other situations, such as orbits of small bodies around a star such as the Sun.

Kepler's laws of planetary motion:
Orbits are elliptical, with the more massive body at one focus of the ellipse. A special case of this is a circular orbit (a circle is a special case of ellipse) with the planet at the center.
A line drawn from the planet to the satellite sweeps out equal areas in equal times no matter which portion of the orbit is measured.
The square of a satellite's orbital period is proportional to the cube of its average distance from the planet.
Without applying force (such as firing a rocket engine), the period and shape of the satellite's orbit will not change.
A satellite in a low orbit (or a low part of an elliptical orbit) moves more quickly with respect to the surface of the planet than a satellite in a higher orbit (or a high part of an elliptical orbit), due to the stronger gravitational attraction closer to the planet.
If thrust is applied at only one point in the satellite's orbit, it will return to that same point on each subsequent orbit, though the rest of its path will change. Thus one cannot move from one circular orbit to another with only one brief application of thrust.
From a circular orbit, thrust applied in a direction opposite to the satellite's motion changes the orbit to an elliptical one; the satellite will descend and reach the lowest orbital point (the periapse) at 180 degrees away from the firing point; then it will ascend back. The period of the resultant orbit will be less than that of the original circular orbit. Thrust applied in the direction of the satellite's motion creates an elliptical orbit with its highest point (apoapse) 180 degrees away from the firing point. The period of the resultant orbit will be longer than that of the original circular orbit.
The consequences of the rules of orbital mechanics are sometimes counter-intuitive. For example, if two spacecraft are in the same circular orbit and wish to dock, the trailing craft cannot simply fire its engines to accelerate towards the leading craft. This will change the shape of its orbit, causing it to gain altitude and slow down relative to the leading craft, thus moving away from the target. The space rendezvous before docking normally takes multiple precisely calculated engine firings in multiple orbital periods, requiring hours or even days to complete.
To the extent that the standard assumptions of astrodynamics do not hold, actual trajectories will vary from those calculated. For example, simple atmospheric drag is another complicating factor for objects in low Earth orbit.
These rules of thumb are decidedly inaccurate when describing two or more bodies of similar mass, such as a binary star system (see n-body problem). Celestial mechanics uses more general rules applicable to a wider variety of situations. Kepler's laws of planetary motion, which can be mathematically derived from Newton's laws, hold strictly only in describing the motion of two gravitating bodies in the absence of non-gravitational forces; they also describe parabolic and hyperbolic trajectories. In the close proximity of large objects like stars the differences between classical mechanics and general relativity also become important.

== Laws of astrodynamics ==

The fundamental laws of astrodynamics are Newton's law of universal gravitation and Newton's laws of motion, while the fundamental mathematical tool is differential calculus.
In a Newtonian framework, the laws governing orbits and trajectories are in principle time-symmetric.
Standard assumptions in astrodynamics include non-interference from outside bodies, negligible mass for one of the bodies, and negligible other forces (such as from the solar wind, atmospheric drag, etc.). More accurate calculations can be made without these simplifying assumptions, but they are more complicated. The increased accuracy often does not make enough of a difference in the calculation to be worthwhile.
Kepler's laws of planetary motion may be derived from Newton's laws, when it is assumed that the orbiting body is subject only to the gravitational force of the central attractor. When an engine thrust or propulsive force is present, Newton's laws still apply, but Kepler's laws are invalidated. When the thrust stops, the resulting orbit will be different but will once again be described by Kepler's laws which have been set out above. The three laws are:

The orbit of every planet is an ellipse with the Sun at one of the foci.
A line joining a planet and the Sun sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time.
The squares of the orbital periods of planets are directly proportional to the cubes of the semi-major axis of the orbits.

=== Escape velocity ===

The formula for an escape velocity is derived as follows. The specific energy (energy per unit mass) of any space vehicle is composed of two components, the specific potential energy and the specific kinetic energy. The specific potential energy associated with a planet of mass M is given by

          ϵ

            p

        =
        −

              G
              M

            r

        ,

    {\displaystyle \epsilon _{p}=-{\frac {GM}{r}},}

where G is the gravitational constant and r is the distance between the two bodies. The specific kinetic energy of an object is given by

          ϵ

            k

        =

              v

                2

            2

        ,

    {\displaystyle \epsilon _{k}={\frac {v^{2}}{2}},}

where v is its velocity. So the total specific orbital energy is

        ϵ
        =

          ϵ

            k

        +

          ϵ

            p

        =

              v

                2

            2

        −

              G
              M

            r

        .

    {\displaystyle \epsilon =\epsilon _{k}+\epsilon _{p}={\frac {v^{2}}{2}}-{\frac {GM}{r}}.}

Since energy is conserved, 

        ϵ

    {\displaystyle \epsilon }

 cannot depend on the distance, 

        r

    {\displaystyle r}

, from the center of the central body to the space vehicle in question, i.e. v must vary with r to keep the specific orbital energy constant. Therefore, the object can reach infinite 

        r

    {\displaystyle r}

 only if this quantity is nonnegative, which implies

        v
        ≥

                2
                G
                M

              r

        .

    {\displaystyle v\geq {\sqrt {\frac {2GM}{r}}}.}

The escape velocity from the Earth's surface is about 11 km/s, but that is insufficient to send the body an infinite distance because of the gravitational pull of the Sun. To escape the Solar System from a location at a distance from the Sun equal to the distance Sun–Earth, but not close to the Earth, requires around 42 km/s velocity, but there will be "partial credit" for the Earth's orbital velocity for spacecraft launched from Earth, if their further acceleration (due to the propulsion system) carries them in the same direction as Earth travels in its orbit.

=== Formulae for free orbits ===
Orbits are conic sections, so the formula for the distance of a body for a given angle corresponds to the formula for that curve in polar coordinates, which is

                r

                =

                    p

                      1
                      +
                      e
                      cos
                      ⁡
                      θ

                ,

                μ

                =
                G
                (

                  m

                    1

                +

                  m

                    2

                )
                ,

                p

                =

                  h

                    2

                  /

                μ
                ,

    {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}r&={\frac {p}{1+e\cos \theta }},\\\mu &=G(m_{1}+m_{2}),\\p&=h^{2}/\mu ,\end{aligned}}}

where 

        μ

    {\displaystyle \mu }

 is called the gravitational parameter, 

          m

            1

    {\displaystyle m_{1}}

 and 

          m

            2

    {\displaystyle m_{2}}

 are the masses of objects 1 and 2, and 

        h

    {\displaystyle h}

 is the specific angular momentum of object 2 with respect to object 1. The parameter 

        θ

    {\displaystyle \theta }

 is known as the true anomaly, 

        p

    {\displaystyle p}

 is the semi-latus rectum, while 

        e

    {\displaystyle e}

 is the orbital eccentricity, all obtainable from the various forms of the six independent orbital elements.

=== Circular orbits ===

All bounded orbits where the gravity of a central body dominates are elliptical in nature. A special case of this is the circular orbit, which is an ellipse of zero eccentricity. The formula for the velocity of a body in a circular orbit at distance r from the center of gravity of mass M can be derived as follows:
Centrifugal acceleration matches the acceleration due to gravity. So,

              v

                2

            r

        =

              G
              M

              r

                2

        .

    {\displaystyle {\frac {v^{2}}{r}}={\frac {GM}{r^{2}}}.}

Therefore,

        v
        =

                G
                M

              r

        ,

    {\displaystyle v={\sqrt {\frac {GM}{r}}},}

where G = 6.6743×10−11 m3/(kg·s2) is the gravitational constant.
To properly use this formula, the units must be consistent; for example, 

        M

    {\displaystyle M}

 must be in kilograms, and 

        r

    {\displaystyle r}

 must be in meters, then the answer will be in meters per second.
The quantity 

        G
        M

    {\displaystyle GM}

 is often termed the standard gravitational parameter, which has a different value for every planet or moon in the Solar System.
Once the circular orbital velocity is known, the escape velocity is easily found by multiplying by 

            2

    {\displaystyle {\sqrt {2}}}

:

        v
        =

            2

                G
                M

              r

        =

                2
                G
                M

              r

        .

    {\displaystyle v={\sqrt {2}}{\sqrt {\frac {GM}{r}}}={\sqrt {\frac {2GM}{r}}}.}

To escape from gravity, the kinetic energy must at least match the negative potential energy. Therefore,

                    1
                    2

                m

                  v

                    2

                =

                      G
                      M
                      m

                    r

                ,

                v
                =

                        2
                        G
                        M

                      r

                .

    {\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}&{\frac {1}{2}}mv^{2}={\frac {GMm}{r}},\\&v={\sqrt {\frac {2GM}{r}}}.\end{aligned}}}

=== Elliptical orbits ===
If 

        0
        <
        e
        <
        1

    {\displaystyle 0<e<1}

, then the denominator of the equation of free orbits varies with the true anomaly 

        θ

    {\displaystyle \theta }

, but remains positive, never becoming zero. Therefore, the relative position vector remains bounded, having its smallest magnitude at periapsis 

          r

            p

    {\displaystyle r_{p}}

, which is given by

          r

            p

        =

            p

              1
              +
              e

        .

    {\displaystyle r_{p}={\frac {p}{1+e}}.}

The maximum value 

        r

    {\displaystyle r}

 is reached when 

        θ
        =

          180

            ∘

    {\displaystyle \theta =180^{\circ }}

. This point is called the apoapsis, and its radial coordinate, denoted 

          r

            a

    {\displaystyle r_{a}}

, is

          r

            a

        =

            p

              1
              −
              e

        .

    {\displaystyle r_{a}={\frac {p}{1-e}}.}

Let 

        2
        a

    {\displaystyle 2a}

 be the distance measured along the apse line from periapsis 

        P

    {\displaystyle P}

 to apoapsis 

        A

    {\displaystyle A}

:

        2
        a
        =

          r

            p

        +

          r

            a

        .

    {\displaystyle 2a=r_{p}+r_{a}.}

Substituting the equations above, we get

        a
        =

            p

              1
              −

                e

                  2

        ,

    {\displaystyle a={\frac {p}{1-e^{2}}},}

where a is the semimajor axis of the ellipse. Solving for 

        p

    {\displaystyle p}

 and substituting the result in the conic section curve formula above, we get

        r
        =

              a
              (
              1
              −

                e

                  2

              )

              1
              +
              e
              cos
              ⁡
              θ

        .

    {\displaystyle r={\frac {a(1-e^{2})}{1+e\cos \theta }}.}

==== Orbital period ====
Under standard assumptions the orbital period (

        T

    {\displaystyle T}

) of a body traveling along an elliptic orbit can be computed as

        T
        =
        2
        π

                a

                  3

              μ

        ,

    {\displaystyle T=2\pi {\sqrt {\frac {a^{3}}{\mu }}},}

where 

        μ

    {\displaystyle \mu }

 is the standard gravitational parameter, and 

        a

    {\displaystyle a}

 is the length of the semi-major axis.
Conclusions:

The orbital period is equal to that for a circular orbit with the orbit radius equal to the semi-major axis (

        a

    {\displaystyle a}

).
For a given semi-major axis the orbital period does not depend on the eccentricity (see also Kepler's third law).

==== Velocity ====
Under standard assumptions the orbital speed (

        v

    {\displaystyle v}

) of a body traveling along an elliptic orbit can be computed from the vis-viva equation as

        v
        =

            μ

              (

                    2
                    r

                −

                    1
                    a

              )

        ,

    {\displaystyle v={\sqrt {\mu \left({\frac {2}{r}}-{\frac {1}{a}}\right)}},}

where 

        μ

    {\displaystyle \mu }

 is the standard gravitational parameter, 

        r

    {\displaystyle r}

 is the distance between the orbiting bodies, 

        a

    {\displaystyle a}

 is the length of the semi-major axis.
The velocity equation for a hyperbolic trajectory is

        v
        =

            μ

              (

                    2
                    r

                +

                    1

                        |

                      a

                        |

              )

        .

    {\displaystyle v={\sqrt {\mu \left({\frac {2}{r}}+{\frac {1}{|a|}}\right)}}.}

==== Energy ====
Under standard assumptions, specific orbital energy (

        ϵ

    {\displaystyle \epsilon }

) of elliptic orbit is negative, and the orbital energy conservation equation (the vis-viva equation) for this orbit can take the form

              v

                2

            2

        −

            μ
            r

        =
        −

            μ

              2
              a

        =
        ϵ
        <
        0
        ,

    {\displaystyle {\frac {v^{2}}{2}}-{\frac {\mu }{r}}=-{\frac {\mu }{2a}}=\epsilon <0,}

where 

        v

    {\displaystyle v}

 is the speed of the orbiting body, 

        r

    {\displaystyle r}

 is the distance of the orbiting body from the center of mass of the central body, 

        a

    {\displaystyle a}

 is the semi-major axis, 

        μ

    {\displaystyle \mu }

 is the standard gravitational parameter.
Conclusions:

For a given semi-major axis the specific orbital energy is independent of the eccentricity.
Using the virial theorem we find:

the time-average of the specific potential energy is equal to 

        2
        ϵ

    {\displaystyle 2\epsilon }

,
the time-average of 

          r

            −
            1

    {\displaystyle r^{-1}}

 is 

          a

            −
            1

    {\displaystyle a^{-1}}

,
the time-average of the specific kinetic energy is equal to 

        −
        ϵ

    {\displaystyle -\epsilon }

.

=== Parabolic orbits ===
If the eccentricity equals 1, then the orbit equation becomes

        r
        =

              h

                2

            μ

            1

              1
              +
              cos
              ⁡
              θ

        ,

    {\displaystyle r={\frac {h^{2}}{\mu }}{\frac {1}{1+\cos \theta }},}

where 

        r

    {\displaystyle r}

 is the radial distance of the orbiting body from the mass center of the central body, 

        h

    {\displaystyle h}

 is specific angular momentum of the orbiting body, 

        θ

    {\displaystyle \theta }

 is the true anomaly of the orbiting body, 

        μ

    {\displaystyle \mu }

 is the standard gravitational parameter.
As the true anomaly θ approaches 180°, the denominator approaches zero, so that r tends towards infinity. Hence, the energy of the trajectory for which e = 1 is zero, and is given by

        ϵ
        =

              v

                2

            2

        −

            μ
            r

        =
        0
        ,

    {\displaystyle \epsilon ={\frac {v^{2}}{2}}-{\frac {\mu }{r}}=0,}

where 

        v

    {\displaystyle v}

 is the speed of the orbiting body.
In other words, the speed anywhere on a parabolic path is

        v
        =

                2
                μ

              r

        .

    {\displaystyle v={\sqrt {\frac {2\mu }{r}}}.}

=== Hyperbolic orbits ===
If 

        e
        >
        1

    {\displaystyle e>1}

, the orbit formula

        r
        =

              h

                2

            μ

            1

              1
              +
              e
              cos
              ⁡
              θ

    {\displaystyle r={\frac {h^{2}}{\mu }}{\frac {1}{1+e\cos \theta }}}

describes the geometry of the hyperbolic orbit. The system consists of two symmetric curves. The orbiting body occupies one of them; the other one is its empty mathematical image. Clearly, the denominator of the equation above goes to zero when 

        cos
        ⁡
        θ
        =
        −
        1

          /

        e

    {\displaystyle \cos \theta =-1/e}

. We denote this value of true anomaly

          θ

            ∞

        =

          cos

            −
            1

        ⁡

          (

            −

                1
                e

          )

        ,

    {\displaystyle \theta _{\infty }=\cos ^{-1}\left(-{\frac {1}{e}}\right),}

since the radial distance approaches infinity as the true anomaly approaches 

          θ

            ∞

    {\displaystyle \theta _{\infty }}

, known as the true anomaly of the asymptote. Observe that 

          θ

            ∞

    {\displaystyle \theta _{\infty }}

 lies between 90° and 180°. From the trigonometric identity 

          sin

            2

        ⁡
        θ
        +

          cos

            2

        ⁡
        θ
        =
        1

    {\displaystyle \sin ^{2}\theta +\cos ^{2}\theta =1}

 it follows that

        sin
        ⁡

          θ

            ∞

        =

            1
            e

              e

                2

            −
            1

        .

    {\displaystyle \sin \theta _{\infty }={\frac {1}{e}}{\sqrt {e^{2}-1}}.}

==== Energy ====
Under standard assumptions, specific orbital energy (

        ϵ

    {\displaystyle \epsilon }

) of a hyperbolic trajectory is greater than zero, and the orbital energy conservation equation for this kind of trajectory takes form

        ϵ
        =

              v

                2

            2

        −

            μ
            r

        =

            μ

              −
              2
              a

        ,

    {\displaystyle \epsilon ={\frac {v^{2}}{2}}-{\frac {\mu }{r}}={\frac {\mu }{-2a}},}

where 

        v

    {\displaystyle v}

 is the orbital velocity of orbiting body, 

        r

    {\displaystyle r}

 is the radial distance of orbiting body from central body, 

        a

    {\displaystyle a}

 is the negative semi-major axis of the orbit's hyperbola, 

        μ

    {\displaystyle \mu }

 is standard gravitational parameter.

==== Hyperbolic excess velocity ====

Under standard assumptions the body traveling along a hyperbolic trajectory will attain at 

        r
        =
        ∞

    {\displaystyle r=\infty }

 an orbital velocity called hyperbolic excess velocity (

          v

            ∞

    {\displaystyle v_{\infty }}

) that can be computed as

          v

            ∞

        =

              μ

                −
                a

        ,

    {\displaystyle v_{\infty }={\sqrt {\frac {\mu }{-a}}},}

where 

        μ

    {\displaystyle \mu }

 is standard gravitational parameter, 

        a

    {\displaystyle a}

 is the negative semi-major axis of orbit's hyperbola.
The hyperbolic excess velocity is related to the specific orbital energy or characteristic energy by

        2
        ϵ
        =

          C

            3

        =

          v

            ∞

            2

        .

    {\displaystyle 2\epsilon =C_{3}=v_{\infty }^{2}.}

== Calculating trajectories ==

=== Kepler's equation ===
One approach to calculating orbits (mainly used historically) is to use Kepler's equation:

        M
        =
        E
        −
        ϵ
        sin
        ⁡
        E
        ,

    {\displaystyle M=E-\epsilon \sin E,}

where M is the mean anomaly, E is the eccentric anomaly, and 

        ϵ

    {\displaystyle \epsilon }

 is the eccentricity.
With Kepler's formula, finding the time of flight to reach an angle (true anomaly) of 

        θ

    {\displaystyle \theta }

 from periapsis is broken into two steps:

Compute the eccentric anomaly 

        E

    {\displaystyle E}

 from true anomaly 

        θ

    {\displaystyle \theta }

.
Compute the time of flight 

        t

    {\displaystyle t}

 from the eccentric anomaly 

        E

    {\displaystyle E}

.
Finding the eccentric anomaly at a given time (the inverse problem) is more difficult. Kepler's equation is transcendental in 

        E

    {\displaystyle E}

, meaning that it cannot be solved for 

        E

    {\displaystyle E}

 algebraically. Kepler's equation can be solved for 

        E

    {\displaystyle E}

 analytically by inversion.
A solution of Kepler's equation, valid for all real values of 

        ϵ

    {\displaystyle \epsilon }

 is

        E
        =

            {

                      ∑

                        n
                        =
                        1

                        ∞

                          M

                              n
                              3

                          n
                          !

                      lim

                        θ
                        →
                        0

                      (

                                d

                                n
                                −
                                1

                                d

                                θ

                                  n
                                  −
                                  1

                          [

                              (

                                  θ

                                      θ
                                      −
                                      sin
                                      ⁡
                                      θ

                                      3

                              )

                              n

                          ]

                      )

                    ,

                  ϵ
                  =
                  1
                  ,

                      ∑

                        n
                        =
                        1

                        ∞

                          M

                            n

                          n
                          !

                      lim

                        θ
                        →
                        0

                      (

                                d

                                n
                                −
                                1

                                d

                                θ

                                  n
                                  −
                                  1

                          [

                              (

                                  θ

                                    θ
                                    −
                                    ϵ
                                    sin
                                    ⁡
                                    θ

                              )

                              n

                          ]

                      )

                    ,

                  ϵ
                  ≠
                  1.

    {\displaystyle E={\begin{cases}\displaystyle \sum _{n=1}^{\infty }{\frac {M^{\frac {n}{3}}}{n!}}\lim _{\theta \to 0}\left({\frac {\mathrm {d} ^{n-1}}{\mathrm {d} \theta ^{n-1}}}\left{\theta -\sin \theta }}}\right)^{n}\right]\right),&\epsilon =1,\\\displaystyle \sum _{n=1}^{\infty }{\frac {M^{n}}{n!}}\lim _{\theta \to 0}\left({\frac {\mathrm {d} ^{n-1}}{\mathrm {d} \theta ^{n-1}}}\left\right),&\epsilon \neq 1.\end{cases}}}

Evaluating this yields

        E
        =

            {

                    x
                    +

                        1
                        60

                      x

                        3

                    +

                        1
                        1400

                      x

                        5

                    +

                        1
                        25200

                      x

                        7

                    +

                        43
                        17248000

                      x

                        9

                    +

                        1213
                        7207200000

                      x

                        11

                    +

                        151439
                        12713500800000

                      x

                        13

                    ⋯
                    ∣
                    x
                    =
                    (
                    6
                    M

                      )

                          1
                          3

                    ,

                  ϵ
                  =
                  1

                        1

                          1
                          −
                          ϵ

                    M
                    −

                        ϵ

                          (
                          1
                          −
                          ϵ

                            )

                              4

                          M

                            3

                          3
                          !

                    +

                          (
                          9

                            ϵ

                              2

                          +
                          ϵ
                          )

                          (
                          1
                          −
                          ϵ

                            )

                              7

                          M

                            5

                          5
                          !

                    −

                          (
                          225

                            ϵ

                              3

                          +
                          54

                            ϵ

                              2

                          +
                          ϵ
                          )

                          (
                          1
                          −
                          ϵ

                            )

                              10

                          M

                            7

                          7
                          !

                    +

                          (
                          11025

                            ϵ

                              4

                          +
                          4131

                            ϵ

                              3

                          +
                          243

                            ϵ

                              2

                          +
                          ϵ
                          )

                          (
                          1
                          −
                          ϵ

                            )

                              13

                          M

                            9

                          9
                          !

                    ⋯
                    ,

                  ϵ
                  ≠
                  1.

    {\displaystyle E={\begin{cases}\displaystyle x+{\frac {1}{60}}x^{3}+{\frac {1}{1400}}x^{5}+{\frac {1}{25200}}x^{7}+{\frac {43}{17248000}}x^{9}+{\frac {1213}{7207200000}}x^{11}+{\frac {151439}{12713500800000}}x^{13}\cdots \mid x=(6M)^{\frac {1}{3}},&\epsilon =1\\\displaystyle {\frac {1}{1-\epsilon }}M-{\frac {\epsilon }{(1-\epsilon )^{4}}}{\frac {M^{3}}{3!}}+{\frac {(9\epsilon ^{2}+\epsilon )}{(1-\epsilon )^{7}}}{\frac {M^{5}}{5!}}-{\frac {(225\epsilon ^{3}+54\epsilon ^{2}+\epsilon )}{(1-\epsilon )^{10}}}{\frac {M^{7}}{7!}}+{\frac {(11025\epsilon ^{4}+4131\epsilon ^{3}+243\epsilon ^{2}+\epsilon )}{(1-\epsilon )^{13}}}{\frac {M^{9}}{9!}}\cdots ,&\epsilon \neq 1.\end{cases}}}

Alternatively, Kepler's equation can be solved numerically. First, one must guess a value of 

        E

    {\displaystyle E}

 and solve for time of flight; then adjust 

        E

    {\displaystyle E}

 as necessary to bring the computed time of flight closer to the desired value until the required precision is achieved. Usually, Newton's method is used to achieve relatively fast convergence.
The main difficulty with this approach is that it can take prohibitively long to converge for the extreme elliptical orbits. For near-parabolic orbits, eccentricity 

        ϵ

    {\displaystyle \epsilon }

 is nearly 1, and substituting 

        e
        =
        1

    {\displaystyle e=1}

 into the formula for mean anomaly, 

        E
        −
        sin
        ⁡
        E

    {\displaystyle E-\sin E}

, we find ourselves subtracting two nearly equal values, and accuracy suffers. For near-circular orbits, it is hard to find the periapsis in the first place (and truly circular orbits have no periapsis at all). Furthermore, the equation was derived on the assumption of an elliptical orbit, and so it does not hold for parabolic or hyperbolic orbits. These difficulties are what led to the development of the universal variable formulation, described below.

=== Conic orbits ===
For simple procedures, such as computing the delta-v for coplanar transfer ellipses, traditional approaches are fairly effective. Others, such as time-of-flight are far more complicated, especially for near-circular and hyperbolic orbits.

=== The patched conic approximation ===

The Hohmann transfer orbit alone is a poor approximation for interplanetary trajectories because it neglects the planets' own gravity. Planetary gravity dominates the behavior of the spacecraft in the vicinity of a planet and in most cases Hohmann severely overestimates delta-v, and produces highly inaccurate prescriptions for burn timings. A relatively simple way to get a first-order approximation of delta-v is based on the "patched conic approximation" technique. One must choose the one dominant gravitating body in each region of space through which the trajectory will pass, and to model only that body's effects in that region. For instance, on a trajectory from the Earth to Mars, one would begin by considering only the Earth's gravity until the trajectory reaches a distance where the Earth's gravity no longer dominates that of the Sun. The spacecraft would be given escape velocity to send it on its way to interplanetary space. Next, one would consider only the Sun's gravity until the trajectory reaches the neighborhood of Mars. During this stage, the transfer orbit model is appropriate. Finally, only Mars's gravity is considered during the final portion of the trajectory where Mars's gravity dominates the spacecraft's behavior. The spacecraft would approach Mars on a hyperbolic orbit, and a final retrograde burn would slow the spacecraft enough to be captured by Mars. Friedrich Zander was one of the first to apply the patched-conics approach for astrodynamics purposes, when proposing the use of intermediary bodies' gravity for interplanetary travels, in what is known today as a gravity assist.
The size of the "neighborhoods" (or spheres of influence) vary with radius

          r

            SOI

        =

          a

            p

            (

                  m

                    p

                  m

                    S

            )

            2

              /

            5

        .

    {\displaystyle r_{\text{SOI}}=a_{\text{p}}\left({\frac {m_{\text{p}}}{m_{\text{S}}}}\right)^{2/5}.}

where 

          a

            p

    {\displaystyle a_{\text{p}}}

 is the semimajor axis of the planet's orbit relative to the Sun; 

          m

            p

    {\displaystyle m_{\text{p}}}

 and 

          m

            S

    {\displaystyle m_{\text{S}}}

 are the masses of the planet and Sun, respectively.
This simplification is sufficient to compute rough estimates of fuel requirements, and rough time-of-flight estimates, but it is not generally accurate enough to guide a spacecraft to its destination. For that, numerical methods are required.

=== The universal variable formulation ===
To address the computational shortcomings of traditional approaches for solving the 2-body problem, the universal variable formulation was developed. It works equally well for the circular, elliptical, parabolic, and hyperbolic cases, the differential equations converging well when integrated for any orbit. It also generalizes well to problems incorporating perturbation theory.

=== Perturbations ===
The universal variable formulation works well with the variation of parameters technique, except now, instead of the six Keplerian orbital elements, we use a different set of orbital elements: namely, the satellite's initial position and velocity vectors 

          x

            0

    {\displaystyle x_{0}}

 and 

          v

            0

    {\displaystyle v_{0}}

 at a given epoch 

        t
        =
        0

    {\displaystyle t=0}

. In a two-body simulation, these elements are sufficient to compute the satellite's position and velocity at any time in the future, using the universal variable formulation. Conversely, at any moment in the satellite's orbit, we can measure its position and velocity, and then use the universal variable approach to determine what its initial position and velocity would have been at the epoch. In perfect two-body motion, these orbital elements would be invariant (just like the Keplerian elements would be).
However, perturbations cause the orbital elements to change over time. Hence, the position element is written as 

          x

            0

        (
        t
        )

    {\displaystyle x_{0}(t)}

 and the velocity element as 

          v

            0

        (
        t
        )

    {\displaystyle v_{0}(t)}

, indicating that they vary with time. The technique to compute the effect of perturbations becomes one of finding expressions, either exact or approximate, for the functions 

          x

            0

        (
        t
        )

    {\displaystyle x_{0}(t)}

 and 

          v

            0

        (
        t
        )

    {\displaystyle v_{0}(t)}

.
The following are some effects which make real orbits differ from the simple models based on a spherical Earth. Most of them can be handled on short timescales (perhaps less than a few thousand orbits) by perturbation theory because they are small relative to the corresponding two-body effects.

Equatorial bulges cause precession of the node and the perigee
Tesseral harmonics of the gravity field introduce additional perturbations
Lunar and solar gravity perturbations alter the orbits
Atmospheric drag reduces the semi-major axis unless make-up thrust is used
Over very long timescales (perhaps millions of orbits), even small perturbations can dominate, and the behavior can become chaotic. On the other hand, the various perturbations can be orchestrated by clever astrodynamicists to assist with orbit maintenance tasks, such as station-keeping, ground track maintenance or adjustment, or phasing of perigee to cover selected targets at low altitude.

== Orbital maneuver ==

In spaceflight, an orbital maneuver is the use of propulsion systems to change the orbit of a spacecraft. For spacecraft far from Earth—for example those in orbits around the Sun—an orbital maneuver is called a deep-space maneuver (DSM).

=== Orbital transfer ===
Transfer orbits are usually elliptical orbits that allow spacecraft to move from one (usually substantially circular) orbit to another. Usually, they require a burn at the start, a burn at the end, and sometimes one or more burns in the middle.

The Hohmann transfer orbit requires a minimal delta-v.
A bi-elliptic transfer can require less energy than the Hohmann transfer, if the ratio of orbits is 11.94 or greater, but comes at the cost of increased trip time over the Hohmann transfer.
Faster transfers may use any orbit that intersects both the original and destination orbits, at the cost of higher delta-v.
Using low thrust engines (such as electrical propulsion), if the initial orbit is supersynchronous to the final desired circular orbit then the optimal transfer orbit is achieved by thrusting continuously in the direction of the velocity at apogee. This method however takes much longer due to the low thrust.
For the case of orbital transfer between non-coplanar orbits, the change-of-plane thrust must be made at the point where the orbital planes intersect (the "node"). As the objective is to change the direction of the velocity vector by an angle equal to the angle between the planes, almost all of this thrust should be made when the spacecraft is at the node near the apoapse, when the magnitude of the velocity vector is at its lowest. However, a small fraction of the orbital inclination change can be made at the node near the periapse, by slightly angling the transfer orbit injection thrust in the direction of the desired inclination change. This works because the cosine of a small angle is very nearly one, resulting in the small plane change being effectively "free" despite the high velocity of the spacecraft near periapse, as the Oberth Effect due to the increased, slightly angled thrust exceeds the cost of the thrust in the orbit-normal axis.

=== Gravity assist and the Oberth effect ===
In a gravity assist, a spacecraft swings by a planet and leaves in a different direction, at a different speed. This is useful to speed or slow a spacecraft instead of carrying more fuel.
This maneuver can be approximated by an elastic collision at large distances, though the flyby does not involve any physical contact. Due to Newton's third law (equal and opposite reaction), any momentum gained by a spacecraft must be lost by the planet, or vice versa. However, because the planet is much, much more massive than the spacecraft, the effect on the planet's orbit is negligible.
The Oberth effect can be employed, particularly during a gravity assist operation. This effect is that use of a propulsion system works better at high speeds, and hence course changes are best done when close to a gravitating body; this can multiply the effective delta-v.

=== Interplanetary Transport Network and fuzzy orbits ===

Orbital routes can be identified using nonlinear gravitational interactions between planets and moons in the Solar System. These trajectories are part of the Interplanetary Transport Network and follow chaotic orbital paths that require minimal fuel beyond reaching a Lagrange point, with periodic course corrections. Orbits can be plotted from high Earth orbit to Mars via an Earth trojan points. Limitations include long transit times, often taking several years, and infrequent launch windows.
They have, however, been employed on projects such as Genesis. This spacecraft visited the Earth-Sun L1 point and returned using very little propellant.

== See also ==
Celestial mechanics
Chaos theory
Kepler orbit
Lagrange point
Mechanical engineering
N-body problem
Roche limit
Spacecraft propulsion
Universal variable formulation

== References ==

== Further reading ==
Lynnane George. Introduction to Orbital Mechanics.
Sellers, Jerry J.; Astore, William J.; Giffen, Robert B.; Larson, Wiley J. (2004). Kirkpatrick, Douglas H. (ed.). Understanding Space: An Introduction to Astronautics (2 ed.). McGraw Hill. p. 228. ISBN 0-07-242468-0.
"Air University Space Primer, Chapter 8 - Orbital Mechanics" (PDF). USAF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-02-14. Retrieved 2007-10-13.
Bate, R.R.; Mueller, D.D.; White, J.E. (1971). Fundamentals of Astrodynamics. Dover Publications, New York. ISBN 978-0-486-60061-1.
Vallado, D. A. (2001). Fundamentals of Astrodynamics and Applications (2nd ed.). Springer. ISBN 978-0-7923-6903-5.
Battin, R.H. (1999). An Introduction to the Mathematics and Methods of Astrodynamics. American Institute of Aeronautics & Ast, Washington, D.C. ISBN 978-1-56347-342-5.
Chobotov, V.A., ed. (2002). Orbital Mechanics (3rd ed.). American Institute of Aeronautics & Ast, Washington, D.C. ISBN 978-1-56347-537-5.
Herrick, S. (1971). Astrodynamics: Orbit Determination, Space Navigation, Celestial Mechanics, Volume 1. Van Nostrand Reinhold, London. ISBN 978-0-442-03370-5.
Herrick, S. (1972). Astrodynamics: Orbit Correction, Perturbation Theory, Integration, Volume 2. Van Nostrand Reinhold, London. ISBN 978-0-442-03371-2.
Kaplan, M.H. (1976). Modern Spacecraft Dynamics and Controls. Wiley, New York. ISBN 978-0-471-45703-9.
Tom Logsdon (1997). Orbital Mechanics. Wiley-Interscience, New York. ISBN 978-0-471-14636-0.
John E. Prussing & Bruce A. Conway (1993). Orbital Mechanics. Oxford University Press, New York. ISBN 978-0-19-507834-3.
M.J. Sidi (2000). Spacecraft Dynamics and Control. Cambridge University Press, New York. ISBN 978-0-521-78780-2.
W.E. Wiesel (1996). Spaceflight Dynamics (2nd ed.). McGraw-Hill, New York. ISBN 978-0-07-070110-6.
J.P. Vinti (1998). Orbital and Celestial Mechanics. American Institute of Aeronautics & Ast, Reston, Virginia. ISBN 978-1-56347-256-5.
P. Gurfil (2006). Modern Astrodynamics. Butterworth-Heinemann. ISBN 978-0-12-373562-1.

== External links ==
ORBITAL MECHANICS (Rocket and Space Technology)
Java Astrodynamics Toolkit
Astrodynamics-based Space Traffic and Event Knowledge Graph

In astronautics, the Hohmann transfer orbit () is an orbital maneuver used to transfer a spacecraft between two orbits of different altitudes around a central body. For example, a Hohmann transfer could be used to raise a satellite's orbit from low Earth orbit to geostationary orbit. In the idealized case, the initial and target orbits are both circular and coplanar. The maneuver is accomplished by placing the craft into an elliptical transfer orbit that is tangential to both the initial and target orbits. The maneuver uses two impulsive engine burns: the first establishes the transfer orbit, and the second adjusts the orbit to match the target.
The Hohmann maneuver often uses the lowest possible amount of impulse (which consumes a proportional amount of delta-v, and hence propellant) to accomplish the transfer, but requires a relatively longer travel time than higher-impulse transfers. In some cases where one orbit is much larger than the other, a bi-elliptic transfer can use even less impulse, at the cost of even greater travel time.
The maneuver was named after Walter Hohmann, the German scientist who published a description of it in his 1925 book Die Erreichbarkeit der Himmelskörper (The Attainability of Celestial Bodies). Hohmann was influenced in part by the German science fiction author Kurd Lasswitz and his 1897 book Two Planets.
When used for traveling between celestial bodies, a Hohmann transfer orbit requires that the starting and destination points be at particular locations in their orbits relative to each other.  Space missions using a Hohmann transfer must wait for this required alignment to occur, which opens a launch window.  For a mission between Earth and Mars, for example, these launch windows occur every 26 months.  A Hohmann transfer orbit also determines a fixed time required to travel between the starting and destination points; for an Earth-Mars journey this travel time is about 9 months. When transfer is performed between orbits close to celestial bodies with significant gravitation, much less delta-v is usually required, as the Oberth effect may be employed for the burns.
They are also often used for these situations, but low-energy transfers which take into account the thrust limitations of real engines, and take advantage of the gravity wells of both planets can be more fuel efficient.

== Example ==
The diagram shows a Hohmann transfer orbit to bring a spacecraft from a lower circular orbit into a higher one. It is an elliptic orbit that is tangential both to the lower circular orbit the spacecraft is to leave (cyan, labeled 1 on diagram) and the higher circular orbit that it is to reach (red, labeled 3 on diagram). The transfer orbit (yellow, labeled 2 on diagram) is initiated by firing the spacecraft's engine to add energy and raise the apoapsis. When the spacecraft reaches the apoapsis, a second engine firing adds energy to raise the periapsis, putting the spacecraft in the larger circular orbit.

Due to the reversibility of orbits, a similar Hohmann transfer orbit can be used to bring a spacecraft from a higher orbit into a lower one; in this case, the spacecraft's engine is fired in the opposite direction to its current path, slowing the spacecraft and lowering the periapsis of the elliptical transfer orbit to the altitude of the lower target orbit. The engine is then fired again at the lower distance to slow the spacecraft into the lower circular orbit. 
The Hohmann transfer orbit is based on two instantaneous velocity changes. Extra fuel is required to compensate for the fact that the bursts take time; this is minimized by using high-thrust engines to minimize the duration of the bursts.  For transfers in Earth orbit, the two burns are labelled the perigee burn and the apogee burn (or apogee kick); more generally, for bodies that are not the Earth, they are labelled periapsis and apoapsis burns.  Alternatively, the second burn to circularize the orbit may be referred to as a circularization burn.

=== Type I and Type II ===
An ideal Hohmann transfer orbit transfers between two circular orbits in the same plane and traverses exactly 180° around the primary.  In the real world, the destination orbit may not be circular, and may not be coplanar with the initial orbit.  Real world transfer orbits may traverse slightly more, or slightly less, than 180° around the primary.  An orbit which traverses less than 180° around the primary is called a "Type I" Hohmann transfer, while an orbit which traverses more than 180° is called a "Type II" Hohmann transfer.
Transfer orbits can go more than 360° around the primary. These multiple-revolution transfers are sometimes referred to as Type III and Type IV, where a Type III is a Type I plus 360°, and a Type IV is a Type II plus 360°.

=== Uses ===
A Hohmann transfer orbit can be used to transfer an object's orbit toward another object, as long as they co-orbit a more massive body. In the context of Earth and the Solar System, this includes any object which orbits the Sun. An example of where a Hohmann transfer orbit could be used is to bring an asteroid, orbiting the Sun, into contact with the Earth.

== Calculation ==
For a small body orbiting another much larger body, such as a satellite orbiting Earth, the total energy of the smaller body is the sum of its kinetic energy and potential energy, and this total energy also equals half the potential at the 
average distance 

        a

    {\displaystyle a}

 (the semi-major axis):

        E
        =

              m

                v

                  2

            2

        −

              G
              M
              m

            r

        =

              −
              G
              M
              m

              2
              a

        .

    {\displaystyle E={\frac {mv^{2}}{2}}-{\frac {GMm}{r}}={\frac {-GMm}{2a}}.}

Solving this equation for velocity results in the vis-viva equation,

          v

            2

        =
        μ

          (

                2
                r

            −

                1
                a

          )

        ,

    {\displaystyle v^{2}=\mu \left({\frac {2}{r}}-{\frac {1}{a}}\right),}

where:

        v

    {\displaystyle v}

 is the speed of an orbiting body,

        μ
        =
        G
        M

    {\displaystyle \mu =GM}

 is the standard gravitational parameter of the primary body, assuming 

        M
        +
        m

    {\displaystyle M+m}

 is not significantly bigger than 

        M

    {\displaystyle M}

 (which makes 

          v

            M

        ≪
        v

    {\displaystyle v_{M}\ll v}

), (for Earth, this is μ~3.986E14 m3 s−2)

        r

    {\displaystyle r}

 is the distance of the orbiting body from the primary focus,

        a

    {\displaystyle a}

 is the semi-major axis of the body's orbit.
Therefore, the delta-v (Δv) required for the Hohmann transfer can be computed as follows, under the assumption of instantaneous impulses:

        Δ

          v

            1

        =

              μ

                r

                  1

          (

                    2

                      r

                        2

                      r

                        1

                    +

                      r

                        2

            −
            1

          )

        ,

    {\displaystyle \Delta v_{1}={\sqrt {\frac {\mu }{r_{1}}}}\left({\sqrt {\frac {2r_{2}}{r_{1}+r_{2}}}}-1\right),}

to enter the elliptical orbit at 

        r
        =

          r

            1

    {\displaystyle r=r_{1}}

 from the 

          r

            1

    {\displaystyle r_{1}}

 circular orbit, where 

          r

            2

    {\displaystyle r_{2}}

 is the apoapsis of the resulting elliptical orbit, and

        Δ

          v

            2

        =

              μ

                r

                  2

          (

            1
            −

                    2

                      r

                        1

                      r

                        1

                    +

                      r

                        2

          )

        ,

    {\displaystyle \Delta v_{2}={\sqrt {\frac {\mu }{r_{2}}}}\left(1-{\sqrt {\frac {2r_{1}}{r_{1}+r_{2}}}}\right),}

to leave the elliptical orbit at 

        r
        =

          r

            2

    {\displaystyle r=r_{2}}

 to the 

          r

            2

    {\displaystyle r_{2}}

 circular orbit,
where 

          r

            1

    {\displaystyle r_{1}}

 and 

          r

            2

    {\displaystyle r_{2}}

 are respectively the radii of the departure and arrival circular orbits;  
the smaller of 

          r

            1

    {\displaystyle r_{1}}

 and 

          r

            2

    {\displaystyle r_{2}}

 corresponds to the periapsis distance and the greater of the two radii corresponds to the apoapsis distance of the Hohmann elliptical transfer orbit. Typically, 

        μ

    {\displaystyle \mu }

 is given in units of m3/s2; as such one should be sure to use meters, not kilometers, for 

          r

            1

    {\displaystyle r_{1}}

 and 

          r

            2

    {\displaystyle r_{2}}

. The total 

        Δ
        v

    {\displaystyle \Delta v}

 is then:

        Δ

          v

            total

        =
        Δ

          v

            1

        +
        Δ

          v

            2

        .

    {\displaystyle \Delta v_{\text{total}}=\Delta v_{1}+\Delta v_{2}.}

Whether moving into a higher or lower orbit, by Kepler's third law, the time taken to transfer between the orbits is

          t

            H

        =

            1
            2

                4

                  π

                    2

                  a

                    H

                    3

              μ

        =
        π

                (

                  r

                    1

                +

                  r

                    2

                  )

                    3

                8
                μ

    {\displaystyle t_{\text{H}}={\frac {1}{2}}{\sqrt {\frac {4\pi ^{2}a_{\text{H}}^{3}}{\mu }}}=\pi {\sqrt {\frac {(r_{1}+r_{2})^{3}}{8\mu }}}}

(one half of the orbital period for the whole ellipse), where 

          a

            H

    {\displaystyle a_{\text{H}}}

 is length of semi-major axis of the Hohmann transfer orbit.
In application to traveling from one celestial body to another it is crucial to start maneuver at the time when the two bodies are properly aligned. Considering the target angular velocity being

          ω

            2

        =

              μ

                r

                  2

                  3

        ,

    {\displaystyle \omega _{2}={\sqrt {\frac {\mu }{r_{2}^{3}}}},}

angular alignment α (in radians) at the time of start between the source object and the target object shall be

        α
        =
        π
        −

          ω

            2

          t

            H

        =
        π

          (

            1
            −

                1

                  2

                      2

                    (

                            r

                              1

                            r

                              2

                      +
                      1

                    )

                    3

          )

        .

    {\displaystyle \alpha =\pi -\omega _{2}t_{\text{H}}=\pi \left(1-{\frac {1}{2{\sqrt {2}}}}{\sqrt {\left({\frac {r_{1}}{r_{2}}}+1\right)^{3}}}\right).}

== Example ==

Consider a geostationary transfer orbit, beginning at r1 = 6,678 km (altitude 300 km) and ending in a geostationary orbit with r2 = 42,164 km (altitude 35,786 km).
In the smaller circular orbit the speed is 7.73 km/s; in the larger one, 3.07 km/s. In the elliptical orbit in between the speed varies from 10.15 km/s at the perigee to 1.61 km/s at the apogee.
Therefore the Δv for the first burn is 10.15 − 7.73 = 2.42 km/s, for the second burn 3.07 − 1.61 = 1.46 km/s, and for both together 3.88 km/s.
This is greater than the Δv required for an escape orbit: 10.93 − 7.73 = 3.20 km/s. Applying a Δv at the Low Earth orbit (LEO) of only 0.78 km/s more (3.20−2.42) would give the rocket the escape velocity, which is less than the Δv of 1.46 km/s required to circularize the geosynchronous orbit.  This illustrates the Oberth effect that at large speeds the same Δv provides more specific orbital energy, and energy increase is maximized if one spends the Δv as quickly as possible, rather than spending some, being decelerated by gravity, and then spending some more to overcome the deceleration (of course, the objective of a Hohmann transfer orbit is different).

== Worst case, maximum delta-v ==
As the example above demonstrates, the Δv required to perform a Hohmann transfer between two circular orbits is not the greatest when the destination radius is infinite.  (Escape speed is √2 times orbital speed, so the Δv required to escape is √2 − 1 (41.4%) of the orbital speed.) The Δv required is greatest (53.0% of smaller orbital speed) when the radius of the larger orbit is 15.5817... times that of the smaller orbit. This number is the positive root of x3 − 15x2 − 9x − 1 = 0, which is 

        5
        +
        4

            7

        cos
        ⁡

          (

                1
                3

            arctan
            ⁡

                    3

                37

          )

    {\textstyle 5+4\,{\sqrt {7}}\cos \left({1 \over 3}\arctan {{\sqrt {3}} \over 37}\right)}

.  For higher orbit ratios the Δv required for the second burn decreases faster than the first increases.

== Application to interplanetary travel ==
When used to move a spacecraft from orbiting one planet to orbiting another, the Oberth effect allows to use less delta-v than the sum of the delta-v for separate manoeuvres to escape the first planet, followed by a Hohmann transfer to the second planet, followed by insertion into an orbit around the other planet.
For example, consider a spacecraft travelling from Earth to Mars. At the beginning of its journey, the spacecraft will already have a certain velocity and kinetic energy associated with its orbit around Earth. During the burn the rocket engine applies its delta-v, but the kinetic energy increases as a square law, until it is sufficient to escape the planet's gravitational potential, and then burns more so as to gain enough energy to get into the Hohmann transfer orbit (around the Sun). Because the rocket engine is able to make use of the initial kinetic energy of the propellant, far less delta-v is required over and above that needed to reach escape velocity, and the optimum situation is when the transfer burn is made at minimum altitude (low periapsis) above the planet. The delta-v needed is only 3.6 km/s, only about 0.4 km/s more than needed to escape Earth, even though this results in the spacecraft going 2.9 km/s faster than the Earth as it heads off for Mars (see table below).
At the other end, the spacecraft must decelerate for the gravity of Mars to capture it. This capture burn should optimally be done at low altitude to also make best use of the Oberth effect. Therefore, relatively small amounts of thrust at either end of the trip are needed to arrange the transfer compared to the free space situation.
However, with any Hohmann transfer, the alignment of the two planets in their orbits is crucial – the destination planet and the spacecraft must arrive at the same point in their respective orbits around the Sun at the same time.  This requirement for alignment gives rise to the concept of launch windows.
The term lunar transfer orbit (LTO) is used for the Moon.
It is possible to apply the formula given above to calculate the Δv in km/s needed to enter a Hohmann transfer orbit to arrive at various destinations from Earth (assuming circular orbits for the planets). In this table, the column labeled "Δv to enter Hohmann orbit from Earth's orbit" gives the change from Earth's velocity to the velocity needed to get on a Hohmann ellipse whose other end will be at the desired distance from the Sun. The column labeled "LEO height" gives the velocity needed (in a non-rotating frame of reference centered on the earth) when 300 km above the Earth's surface. This is obtained by adding to the specific kinetic energy the square of the escape velocity (10.93 km/s) from this height. The column "LEO" is simply the previous speed minus the LEO orbital speed of 7.73 km/s.

Note that in most cases, Δv from LEO is less than the Δv to enter Hohmann orbit from Earth's orbit.
To get to the Sun, it is actually not necessary to use a Δv of 24 km/s. One can use 8.8 km/s to go very far away from the Sun, then use a negligible Δv to bring the angular momentum to zero, and then fall into the Sun. This is also known as a bi-elliptic transfer, which is a sequence of two Hohmann transfers. Also, the table does not give the values that would apply when using the Moon for a gravity assist. There are also possibilities of using one planet, like Venus which is the easiest to get to, to assist getting to other planets or the Sun.

== Comparison to other transfers ==

=== Bi-elliptic transfer ===

The bi-elliptic transfer consists of two half-elliptic orbits. From the initial orbit, a first burn expends delta-v to boost the spacecraft into the first transfer orbit with an apoapsis at some point 

          r

            b

    {\displaystyle r_{b}}

 away from the central body. At this point a second burn sends the spacecraft into the second elliptical orbit with periapsis at the radius of the final desired orbit, where a third burn is performed, injecting the spacecraft into the desired orbit.
While they require one more engine burn than a Hohmann transfer and generally require a greater travel time, some bi-elliptic transfers require a lower amount of total delta-v than a Hohmann transfer when the ratio of final to initial semi-major axis is 11.94 or greater, depending on the intermediate semi-major axis chosen.
The idea of the bi-elliptical transfer trajectory was first published by Ary Sternfeld in 1934.

=== Low-thrust transfer ===

Low-thrust engines can perform an approximation of a Hohmann transfer orbit, by creating a gradual enlargement of the initial circular orbit through carefully timed engine firings. This requires a change in velocity (delta-v) that is greater than the two-impulse transfer orbit and takes longer to complete.
Engines such as ion thrusters are more difficult to analyze with the delta-v model. These engines offer a very low thrust and at the same time, much higher delta-v budget, much higher specific impulse, lower mass of fuel and engine. A 2-burn Hohmann transfer maneuver would be impractical with such a low thrust; the maneuver mainly optimizes the use of fuel, but in this situation there is relatively plenty of it.
If only low-thrust maneuvers are planned on a mission, then continuously firing a low-thrust, but very high-efficiency engine might generate a higher delta-v and at the same time use less propellant than a conventional chemical rocket engine.
Going from one circular orbit to another by gradually changing the radius simply requires the same delta-v as the difference between the two speeds. Such maneuver requires more delta-v than a 2-burn Hohmann transfer maneuver, but does so with continuous low thrust rather than the short applications of high thrust.
The amount of propellant mass used measures the efficiency of the maneuver plus the hardware employed for it. The total delta-v used measures the efficiency of the maneuver only. For electric propulsion systems, which tend to be low-thrust, the high efficiency of the propulsive system usually compensates for the higher delta-V compared to the more efficient Hohmann maneuver.
Transfer orbits using electrical propulsion or low-thrust engines optimize the transfer time to reach the final orbit and not the delta-v as in the Hohmann transfer orbit. For geostationary orbit, the initial orbit is set to be supersynchronous and by thrusting continuously in the direction of the velocity at apogee, the transfer orbit transforms to a circular geosynchronous one. This method however takes much longer to achieve due to the low thrust injected into the orbit.

=== Interplanetary Transport Network ===

In 1997, a set of orbits known as the Interplanetary Transport Network (ITN) was published, providing even lower propulsive delta-v (though much slower and longer) paths between different orbits than Hohmann transfer orbits.  The Interplanetary Transport Network is different in nature than Hohmann transfers because Hohmann transfers assume only one large body whereas the Interplanetary Transport Network does not.  The Interplanetary Transport Network is able to achieve the use of less propulsive delta-v by employing gravity assist from the planets.

== See also ==

Bi-elliptic transfer
Delta-v budget
Geostationary transfer orbit
Halo orbit
Lissajous orbit
List of orbits
Orbital mechanics

== Citations ==

== General and cited sources ==

== Further reading ==

Specific impulse (usually abbreviated as Isp) is a physical quantity defined as the ratio of change in momentum (impulse) to the mass used, usually fuel. It typically uses units of metres per second (a SI unit) or feet per second (in imperial units). It is equivalent to thrust (a force, in newtons or pounds) per mass flow rate (in kg/s or lbm/s).
It serves as a measure of how efficiently an engine, such as a rocket or jet engine, generates thrust from propellant. Isp is the effective exhaust velocity used in the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation which calculates how much a vehicle's velocity can be changed with a given quantity of fuel.
Normalized specific impulse is the ratio of specific impulse to Earth's standard acceleration of gravity, g (in m/s2 or ft/s2). It is measured in seconds, and conveniently is the same number in both SI and imperial units. It can be understood as the time that one kilogram of fuel can produce one kilogram-force of thrust, which is equal to the time that one pound-mass of fuel can produce one pound-force of thrust.

== Mathematical derivation ==
Reaction engines, such as rockets and jet engines propel a vehicle by expelling mass in one direction, which pushes the vehicle in the other direction according to Newton's third law of motion. This expelled mass is called the reaction mass. An engine can push harder if it expels the reaction mass at a higher exhaust velocity 

          v

            e

    {\displaystyle v_{e}}

, or expels mass at a faster rate, 

                d

              m

                d

              t

    {\displaystyle {\frac {\mathrm {d} m}{\mathrm {d} t}}}

.
Assuming that the engine expels mass at a constant exhaust velocity 

          v

            e

    {\displaystyle v_{\text{e}}}

, the thrust is

        T
        =

          v

            e

                d

              m

                d

              t

        .

    {\displaystyle T=v_{\text{e}}{\frac {\mathrm {d} m}{\mathrm {d} t}}.}

If this is integrated over time, the result is the total change in momentum. Dividing by the mass shows that the specific impulse is equal to the exhaust velocity. In practice, the specific impulse is usually lower than the actual physical exhaust velocity due to inefficiencies in the rocket, and thus corresponds to an "effective" exhaust velocity. 
The specific impulse 

          I

            sp

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}}

 in units of velocity is defined by 

          T

            avg

        =

          I

            sp

                d

              m

                d

              t

        ,

    {\displaystyle T_{\text{avg}}=I_{\text{sp}}{\frac {\mathrm {d} m}{\mathrm {d} t}},}

where 

          T

            avg

    {\displaystyle T_{\text{avg}}}

 is the average thrust.
The practical meaning of the measurement varies with different types of engines. Car engines consume onboard fuel, breathe environmental air to burn the fuel, and push against the ground beneath them. There is no reaction mass. In this case, Isp is momentum per fuel burned.
Chemical rocket engines, by contrast, carry their fuel, oxidizer, and reaction mass with them, so Isp is momentum per reaction mass.
Airplane engines are in the middle, as they only push against airflow through the engine. Some of this reaction mass is carried with them, and some is breathed from the air. Therefore, "specific impulse" could be taken to mean either "per reaction mass", as with a rocket, or "per fuel burned" as with cars. The latter is the traditional and more common choice. Because of these differences, specific impulse is not directly comparable between different types of engines.
Specific impulse can be taken as a measure of efficiency. In cars and planes, it typically corresponds with fuel mileage; in rocketry, it corresponds to the achievable delta-v, which is the typical way to measure changes between orbits, via the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation 

        Δ
        v
        =

          I

            sp

        ln
        ⁡

              m

                0

              m

                f

        ,

    {\displaystyle \Delta v=I_{\text{sp}}\ln {\frac {m_{0}}{m_{\text{f}}}},}

where 

          I

            sp

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}}

 is the specific impulse measured in units of velocity, and 

          m

            0

        ,

          m

            f

    {\displaystyle m_{0},m_{\text{f}}}

 are the initial and final masses of the rocket. The difference between 

          m

            0

    {\displaystyle m_{0}}

 and 

          m

            f

    {\displaystyle m_{\text{f}}}

 is the reaction mass that was expelled.

== Propulsion systems ==

=== Rockets ===
For any chemical rocket engine, the momentum transfer efficiency depends heavily on the effectiveness of the nozzle. The nozzle is the primary means of converting reactant energy (e.g. thermal or pressure energy) into a flow of momentum moving the same direction. Nozzle shape and effectiveness has a great impact on total momentum transfer from the reaction mass to the rocket. 
The efficiency of the conversion of input energy to reactant energy also affects Isp, either thermal energy in combustion engines or electrical energy in ion engines. This efficiency determines the amount of delta-v a rocket can perform with a given load of fuel. Optimizing the tradeoffs between fuel quantity and specific impulse is one of the fundamental engineering challenges in rocketry.
Although the specific impulse has units of velocity, it almost never corresponds to an actual physical velocity. In chemical and cold gas rockets, the shape of the nozzle has a high impact on the energy-to-momentum conversion. There are other sources of losses and inefficiencies as well, such as the details of the chemical combustion in such engines. The physical exhaust velocity is higher than the "effective exhaust velocity", which is the "velocity" of the specific impulse. The momentum exchanged and the mass used to generate it are physically real measurements. Typically, rocket nozzles work better when the ambient pressure is lower, such as in space versus in the atmosphere. Engines are typically described by a sea-level Isp, and a vacuum Isp, which is higher. Ion engines, however, do not use a nozzle, although they have other sources of losses so that the momentum transferred is lower than the physical exhaust velocity of their reaction mass.
It is common to express specific impulse as the product of two numbers: a characteristic velocity 

          c

            ∗

    {\displaystyle c^{*}}

, which summarizes combustion-chamber performance into a quantity with units of speed, and a thrust coefficient 

          C

            F

    {\displaystyle C_{F}}

, which is a dimensionless quantity that summarizes nozzle performance. An additional factor of 

          g

            0

    {\displaystyle g_{0}}

 is a units conversion.

          I

            sp

        =

                c

                  ∗

              ⋅

                C

                  F

              g

                0

        .

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}={\frac {c^{*}\cdot C_{F}}{g_{0}}}.}

==== Units of seconds ====
In rocketry, the specific impulse is often reported in seconds instead of effective exhaust velocity of an engine (m/s), by dividing through standard gravity 

          g

            0

    {\displaystyle g_{0}}

:

          I

            sp

        =

              v

                e

              g

                0

        =

            F

                    m
                    ˙

              ⋅

                g

                  0

        .

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}={\frac {v_{e}}{g_{0}}}={\frac {F}{{\dot {m}}\cdot g_{0}}}.}

This is convenient when using gravitational force units (kgf or lbf), since Isp then expresses the amount of thrust per unit propellant flow (kg/s or lb/s). Representing specific impulse in units of time also has the advantage of being agnostic between imperial and SI units:

          I

            sp

        =

            (

              F

                    m
                    ˙

            )

        =

            (

              F

                    m
                    ˙

            )

        .

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}{\text{}}={\Bigl (}{\frac {F{\text{}}}{{\dot {m}}{\text{}}}}{\Bigr )}={\Bigl (}{\frac {F{\text{}}}{{\dot {m}}{\text{}}}}{\Bigr )}.}

Physically, Isp measured in seconds is the amount of time a rocket engine can generate thrust, given a quantity of propellant whose weight (under g0) is equal to the engine's thrust. It is the length of time that the engine can produce 1 kgf (or 1 lbf) of thrust from 1 kg (or 1 lb) of propellant.

=== Cars ===
Although the car industry almost never uses specific impulse on any practical level, the measure can be defined, and makes good contrast against other engine types. Car engines breathe external air to combust their fuel, and (via the wheels) react against the ground. The only meaningful way to interpret "specific impulse" is as "thrust per fuelflow", although one must also specify if the force is measured at the crankshaft or at the wheels, since there are transmission losses. Such a measure corresponds to fuel mileage.

=== Airplanes ===
In an aerodynamic context, there are similarities to both cars and rockets. Like cars, airplane engines breathe outside air; unlike cars they react only against fluids flowing through the engine (including the propellers as applicable). There are several possible ways to interpret "specific impulse": as thrust per fuel flow, as thrust per breathing-flow, or as thrust per "turbine-flow" (i.e. excluding air though the propeller/bypass fan). Since the air breathed is not a direct cost, with wide engineering leeway on how much to breathe, the industry traditionally chooses the "thrust per fuel flow" interpretation with its focus on cost efficiency. In this interpretation, the resulting specific impulse numbers are much higher than for rocket engines, although this comparison is quite different — one is with and the other is without reaction mass. It exemplifies the advantage an airplane engine has over a rocket due to not having to carry the air it uses.
As with all kinds of engines, there are many engineering choices and tradeoffs that affect specific impulse. Nonlinear air resistance and the engine's inability to keep a high specific impulse at a fast burn rate are limiting factors to the fuel consumption rate.
As with rocket engines, the interpretation of specific impulse as a "velocity" does not actually correspond to the physical exhaust velocity. Since the usual interpretation excludes much of the reaction mass, the physical velocity of the reactants downstream is much lower than the effective exhaust velocity suggested from the Isp.

== General considerations ==
Specific impulse should not be confused with energy efficiency, which can decrease as specific impulse increases, since propulsion systems that give high specific impulse require high energy to do so.
Specific impulse should not be confused with total thrust. Thrust is the force supplied by the engine and depends on the propellant mass flow through the engine. Specific impulse measures the thrust per propellant mass flow. Thrust and specific impulse are related by the design and propellants of the engine in question, but this relationship is tenuous: in most cases, high thrust and high specific impulse are mutually exclusive engineering goals. For example, LH2/LO2 bipropellant produces higher Isp (due to higher chemical energy and lower exhaust molecular mass) but lower thrust than RP-1/LO2 (due to higher density and propellant flow). In many cases, propulsion systems with very high specific impulse—some ion thrusters reach 25–35 times better Isp than chemical engines—produce correspondingly low thrust. 
When calculating specific impulse, only propellant carried with the vehicle before use is counted, in the standard interpretation. This usage best corresponds to the cost of operating the vehicle. For a chemical rocket, unlike a plane or car, the propellant mass therefore would include both fuel and oxidizer. For any vehicle, optimizing for specific impulse is generally not the same as optimizing for total performance or total cost. In rocketry, a heavier engine with a higher specific impulse may not be as effective in gaining altitude, distance, or velocity as a lighter engine with a lower specific impulse, especially if the latter engine possesses a higher thrust-to-weight ratio. This is a significant reason for most rocket designs having multiple stages. The first stage can optimized for high thrust to effectively fight gravity drag and air drag, while the later stages operating strictly in orbit and in vacuum can be more easily optimized for higher specific impulse, especially for high delta-v orbits.

=== Propellant quantity units ===
The amount of propellant could be defined either in units of mass or weight. If mass is used, specific impulse is an impulse per unit of mass, which dimensional analysis shows to be equivalent to units of speed; this interpretation is commonly labeled the effective exhaust velocity. If a force-based unit system is used, impulse is divided by propellant weight (weight is a measure of force), resulting in units of time. The problem with weight, as a measure of quantity, is that it depends on the acceleration applied to the propellant, which is arbitrary with no relation to the design of the engine. Historically, standard gravity was the reference conversion between weight and mass. But since technology has progressed to the point that we can measure Earth gravity's variation across the surface, and where such differences can cause differences in practical engineering projects (not to mention science projects on other solar bodies), modern science and engineering focus on mass as the measure of quantity, so as to remove the acceleration dependence. Measuring specific impulse by propellant mass gives it the same meaning for a car at sea level, an airplane at cruising altitude, or a helicopter on Mars.
No matter the choice of mass or weight, the resulting quotient of "velocity" or "time" usually doesn't correspond directly to an actual velocity or time. Due to various losses in real engines, the actual exhaust velocity is different from the Isp "velocity" (and for cars there isn't even a sensible definition of "actual exhaust velocity"). Rather, the specific impulse is just that: a physical momentum from a physical quantity of propellant (be that in mass or weight).

== Units ==

The most common unit for specific impulse is the second, as values are identical regardless of whether the calculations are done in SI, imperial, or US customary units. Nearly all manufacturers quote their engine performance in seconds, and the unit is also useful for specifying aircraft engine performance.
The use of metres per second to specify effective exhaust velocity is also reasonably common. The unit is intuitive when describing rocket engines, although the effective exhaust speed of the engines may be significantly different from the actual exhaust speed, especially in gas-generator cycle engines. For airbreathing jet engines, the effective exhaust velocity does not account for the mass of the air used (as the air is taken in from the environment), although it can still be used for comparison purposes.
Metres per second are numerically equivalent to newton-seconds per kg (N·s/kg), and SI measurements of specific impulse can be written in terms of either units interchangeably. This unit highlights the definition of specific impulse as impulse per unit mass of propellant.
Specific fuel consumption is inversely proportional to specific impulse and has units of g/(kN·s) or lb/(lbf·h). Specific fuel consumption is used extensively for describing the performance of air-breathing jet engines.

=== Specific impulse in seconds ===

Specific impulse, measured in seconds, can be thought of as how many seconds one kilogram of fuel can produce one kilogram of thrust. Or, more precisely, how many seconds a given propellant, when paired with a given engine, can accelerate its own initial mass at 1 g. The longer it can accelerate its own mass, the more delta-V it delivers to the whole system.
In other words, given a particular engine and a mass of a particular propellant, specific impulse measures for how long a time that engine can exert a continuous force (thrust) until fully burning that mass of propellant. A given mass of a more energy-dense propellant can burn for a longer duration than some less energy-dense propellant made to exert the same force while burning in an engine. Different engine designs burning the same propellant may not be equally efficient at directing their propellant's energy into effective thrust. 
For all vehicles, specific impulse (impulse per unit weight-on-Earth of propellant) in seconds can be defined by the following equation:

Isp in seconds is the amount of time a rocket engine can generate thrust, given a quantity of propellant the weight of which is equal to the engine's thrust.
The advantage of this formulation is that it may be used for rockets, where all the reaction mass is carried on board, as well as airplanes, where most of the reaction mass is taken from the atmosphere. In addition, giving the result as a unit of time makes the result easily comparable between calculations in SI units, imperial units, US customary units or other unit framework.

==== Imperial units conversion ====
The English unit pound mass is more commonly used than the slug, and when using pounds per second for mass flow rate, it is more convenient to express standard gravity as 1 pound-force per pound-mass. Note that this is equivalent to 32.17405 ft/s2, but expressed in more convenient units. This gives:

          F

            thrust

        =

          I

            sp

        ⋅

              m
              ˙

        ⋅

          (

            1

                  l
                  b
                  f

                  l
                  b
                  m

          )

        .

    {\displaystyle F_{\text{thrust}}=I_{\text{sp}}\cdot {\dot {m}}\cdot \left(1\mathrm {\frac {lbf}{lbm}} \right).}

==== Rocketry ====
In rocketry, the only reaction mass is the propellant, so the specific impulse is calculated using an alternative method, giving results with units of seconds. Specific impulse is defined as the thrust integrated over time per unit weight-on-Earth of the propellant:

          I

            sp

        =

              v

                e

              g

                0

        ,

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}={\frac {v_{\text{e}}}{g_{0}}},}

where

          I

            sp

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}}

 is the specific impulse measured in seconds,

          v

            e

    {\displaystyle v_{\text{e}}}

 is the average exhaust speed along the axis of the engine (in m/s or ft/s),

          g

            0

    {\displaystyle g_{0}}

 is the standard gravity (in m/s2 or ft/s2).
In rockets, due to atmospheric effects, the specific impulse varies with altitude, reaching a maximum in a vacuum. This is because the exhaust velocity is not simply a function of the chamber pressure, but is a function of the difference between the interior and exterior of the combustion chamber. Values are usually given for operation at sea level ("sl") or in a vacuum ("vac").

=== Specific impulse as effective exhaust velocity ===

Because of the geocentric factor of g0 in the equation for specific impulse, many prefer an alternative definition. The specific impulse of a rocket can be defined in terms of thrust per unit mass flow of propellant. This is an equally valid (and in some ways somewhat simpler) way of defining the effectiveness of a rocket propellant. For a rocket, the specific impulse defined in this way is simply the effective exhaust velocity relative to the rocket, ve. "In actual rocket nozzles, the exhaust velocity is not really uniform over the entire exit cross section and such velocity profiles are difficult to measure accurately. A uniform axial velocity, ve, is assumed for all calculations which employ one-dimensional problem descriptions. This effective exhaust velocity represents an average or mass equivalent velocity at which propellant is being ejected from the rocket vehicle." The two definitions of specific impulse are proportional to one another, and related to each other by:

          v

            e

        =

          g

            0

        ⋅

          I

            sp

        ,

    {\displaystyle v_{\text{e}}=g_{0}\cdot I_{\text{sp}},}

where

          I

            sp

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}}

 is the specific impulse in seconds,

          v

            e

    {\displaystyle v_{\text{e}}}

 is the specific impulse measured in m/s, which is the same as the effective exhaust velocity measured in m/s (or ft/s if g is in ft/s2),

          g

            0

    {\displaystyle g_{0}}

 is the standard gravity, 9.80665 m/s2 (in United States customary units 32.174 ft/s2).
This equation is also valid for air-breathing jet engines, but is rarely used in practice.
(Note that different symbols are sometimes used; for example, c is also sometimes seen for exhaust velocity. While the symbol 

          I

            sp

    {\displaystyle I_{\text{sp}}}

 might logically be used for specific impulse in units of (N·s3)/(m·kg); to avoid confusion, it is desirable to reserve this for specific impulse measured in seconds.)
It is related to the thrust, or forward force on the rocket by the equation:

          F

            thrust

        =

          v

            e

        ⋅

              m
              ˙

        ,

    {\displaystyle F_{\text{thrust}}=v_{\text{e}}\cdot {\dot {m}},}

where 

              m
              ˙

    {\displaystyle {\dot {m}}}

 is the propellant mass flow rate, which is the rate of decrease of the vehicle's mass.
A rocket must carry all its propellant with it, so the mass of the unburned propellant must be accelerated along with the rocket itself. Minimizing the mass of propellant required to achieve a given change in velocity is crucial to building effective rockets. The Tsiolkovsky rocket equation shows that for a rocket with a given empty mass and a given amount of propellant, the total change in velocity it can accomplish is proportional to the effective exhaust velocity. 
A spacecraft without propulsion follows an orbit determined by its trajectory and any gravitational field. Deviations from the corresponding velocity pattern (these are called Δv) are achieved by sending exhaust mass in the direction opposite to that of the desired velocity change.

=== Actual exhaust speed versus effective exhaust speed ===
When an engine is run within the atmosphere, the exhaust velocity is reduced by atmospheric pressure, in turn reducing specific impulse. This is a reduction in the effective exhaust velocity, versus the actual exhaust velocity achieved in vacuum conditions. In the case of gas-generator cycle rocket engines, more than one exhaust gas stream is present as turbopump exhaust gas exits through a separate nozzle. Calculating the effective exhaust velocity requires averaging the two mass flows as well as accounting for any atmospheric pressure.
For air-breathing jet engines, particularly turbofans, the actual exhaust velocity and the effective exhaust velocity are different by orders of magnitude. This happens for several reasons. First, a good deal of additional momentum is obtained by using air as reaction mass, such that combustion products in the exhaust have more mass than the burned fuel. Next, inert gases in the atmosphere absorb heat from combustion, and through the resulting expansion provide additional thrust. Lastly, for turbofans and other designs there is even more thrust created by pushing against intake air which never sees combustion directly. These all combine to allow a better match between the airspeed and the exhaust speed, which saves energy/propellant and enormously increases the effective exhaust velocity while reducing the actual exhaust velocity. Again, this is because the mass of the air is not counted in the specific impulse calculation, thus attributing all of the thrust momentum to the mass of the fuel component of the exhaust, and omitting the reaction mass, inert gas, and effect of driven fans on overall engine efficiency from consideration. 
Essentially, the momentum of engine exhaust includes a lot more than just fuel, but specific impulse calculation ignores everything but the fuel. Even though the effective exhaust velocity for an air-breathing engine seems nonsensical in the context of actual exhaust velocity, this is still useful for comparing absolute fuel efficiency of different engines.

=== Density specific impulse ===
A related measure, the density specific impulse, sometimes also referred to as Density Impulse and usually abbreviated as Isd is the product of the average specific gravity of a given propellant mixture and the specific impulse. While less important than the specific impulse, it is an important measure in launch vehicle design, as a low specific impulse implies that bigger tanks will be required to store the propellant, which in turn will have a detrimental effect on the launch vehicle's mass ratio.

=== Specific fuel consumption ===
Specific impulse is inversely proportional to specific fuel consumption (SFC) by the relationship Isp = 1/(go·SFC) for SFC in kg/(N·s) and Isp = 3600/SFC for SFC in lb/(lbf·hr).

== Examples ==

An example of a specific impulse measured in time is 453 seconds, which is equivalent to an effective exhaust velocity of 4.440 km/s (14,570 ft/s), for the RS-25 engines when operating in a vacuum. An air-breathing jet engine typically has a much larger specific impulse than a rocket; for example a turbofan jet engine may have a specific impulse of 6,000 seconds or more at sea level whereas a rocket would be between 200 and 400 seconds.
An air-breathing engine is thus much more propellant efficient than a rocket engine, because the air serves as reaction mass and oxidizer for combustion which does not have to be carried as propellant, and the actual exhaust speed is much lower, so the kinetic energy the exhaust carries away is lower and thus the jet engine uses far less energy to generate thrust. While the actual exhaust velocity is lower for air-breathing engines, the effective exhaust velocity is very high for jet engines. This is because the effective exhaust velocity calculation assumes that the carried propellant is providing all the reaction mass and all the thrust. Hence effective exhaust velocity is not physically meaningful for air-breathing engines; nevertheless, it is useful for comparison with other types of engines.
The highest specific impulse for a chemical propellant ever test-fired in a rocket engine was 542 seconds (5.32 km/s) with a tripropellant of lithium, fluorine, and hydrogen. However, this combination is impractical. Lithium and fluorine are both extremely corrosive, lithium ignites on contact with air, fluorine ignites on contact with most fuels, and hydrogen, while not hypergolic, is an explosive hazard. Fluorine and the hydrogen fluoride (HF) in the exhaust are very toxic, which damages the environment, makes work around the launch pad difficult, and makes getting a launch license that much more difficult. The rocket exhaust is also ionized, which would interfere with radio communication with the rocket.
Nuclear thermal rocket engines differ from conventional rocket engines in that energy is supplied to the propellants by an external nuclear heat source instead of the heat of combustion. The nuclear rocket typically operates by passing liquid hydrogen gas through an operating nuclear reactor. Testing in the 1960s yielded specific impulses of about 850 seconds (8,340 m/s), about twice that of the Space Shuttle engines.
A variety of other rocket propulsion methods, such as ion thrusters, give much higher specific impulse but with much lower thrust; for example the Hall-effect thruster on the SMART-1 satellite has a specific impulse of 1,640 s (16.1 km/s) but a maximum thrust of only 68 mN (0.015 lbf). The variable specific impulse magnetoplasma rocket (VASIMR) engine currently in development will theoretically yield 20 to 300 km/s (66,000 to 984,000 ft/s), and a maximum thrust of 5.7 N (1.3 lbf).

== See also ==

== Notes ==

== References ==

== External links ==
RPA - design tool for liquid rocket engine analysis
List of specific impulses of various rocket fuels

A cryogenic rocket engine is a rocket engine that uses a cryogenic fuel and oxidizer; that is, both its fuel and oxidizer are gases which have been liquefied and are stored at very low temperatures. These highly efficient engines were first flown on the US Atlas-Centaur and were one of the main factors of NASA's success in reaching the Moon by the Saturn V rocket.
Rocket engines burning cryogenic propellants remain in use today on high performance upper stages and boosters. Upper stages are numerous. Boosters include ESA's Ariane 6, ISRO's GSLV, LVM3, JAXA's H-II, NASA's Space Launch System. The United States, Russia, India, Japan, France and China are the only countries that have operational cryogenic rocket engines.

== Cryogenic propellants ==

Rocket engines need high mass flow rates of both oxidizer and fuel to generate useful thrust. Oxygen, the simplest and most common oxidizer, is in the gas phase at standard temperature and pressure, as is hydrogen, the simplest fuel. While it is possible to store propellants as pressurized gases, this would require large, heavy tanks that would make achieving orbital spaceflight difficult if not impossible. On the other hand, if the propellants are cooled sufficiently, they exist in the liquid phase at higher density and lower pressure, simplifying tankage. These cryogenic temperatures vary depending on the propellant, with liquid oxygen existing below −183 °C (−297.4 °F; 90.1 K) and liquid hydrogen below −253 °C (−423.4 °F; 20.1 K). Since one or more of the propellants is in the liquid phase, all cryogenic rocket engines are by definition liquid-propellant rocket engines.
Various cryogenic fuel-oxidizer combinations have been tried, but the combination of liquid hydrogen (LH2) fuel and the liquid oxygen (LOX) oxidizer is one of the most widely used.  Both components are easily and cheaply available, and when burned have one of the highest enthalpy releases in combustion, producing a specific impulse of up to 450 s at an effective exhaust velocity of 4.4 kilometres per second (2.7 mi/s; Mach 13).

== Components and combustion cycles ==
The major components of a cryogenic rocket engine are the combustion chamber, pyrotechnic initiator, fuel injector, fuel and oxidizer turbopumps, cryo valves, regulators, the fuel tanks, and rocket engine nozzle. In terms of feeding propellants to the combustion chamber, cryogenic rocket engines are almost exclusively pump-fed. Pump-fed engines work in a gas-generator cycle, a staged-combustion cycle, or an expander cycle. Gas-generator engines tend to be used on booster engines due to their lower efficiency, staged-combustion engines can fill both roles at the cost of greater complexity, and expander engines are exclusively used on upper stages due to their low thrust.

== LOX+LH2 rocket engines by country ==

Currently, six countries have successfully developed and deployed cryogenic rocket engines:

== Comparison of first stage cryogenic rocket engines ==

== Comparison of upper stage cryogenic rocket engines ==

== References ==

== External links ==
USA's Cryogenic Rocket engine RL10B-2
Russian Cryogenic Rocket Engines

Space debris (also known as space junk, space pollution, space waste, space trash, space garbage, or cosmic debris) are defunct human-made objects in space – principally in Earth orbit – which no longer serve a useful function. These include derelict spacecraft (nonfunctional spacecraft and abandoned launch vehicle stages), mission-related debris, and fragmentation debris from the breakup of derelict rocket bodies and spacecraft. In addition to derelict human-made objects left in orbit, space debris includes fragments from disintegration, erosion, or collisions; solidified liquids expelled from spacecraft; unburned particles from solid rocket motors; and even paint flecks. Space debris represents a risk to spacecraft.
Space debris is typically a negative externality. It creates an external cost on others from the initial action to launch or use a spacecraft in near-Earth orbit, a cost that is typically not taken into account nor fully accounted for by the launcher or payload owner.
Several spacecraft, both crewed and un-crewed, have been damaged or destroyed by space debris. The measurement, mitigation, and potential removal of debris is conducted by some participants in the space industry.
As of April 2025, the European Space Agency's Space Environment statistics reported 40,230 artificial objects in orbit above the Earth regularly tracked by Space Surveillance Networks and maintained in their catalogue. 
However, these are just the objects large enough to be tracked and in an orbit that makes tracking possible. Satellite debris that is in a Molniya orbit, such as the Kosmos Oko series, might be too high above the Northern Hemisphere to be tracked. As of January 2019, more than 128 million pieces of debris smaller than 1 cm (0.4 in), about 900,000 pieces of debris 1–10 cm, and around 34,000 of pieces larger than 10 cm (3.9 in) were estimated to be in orbit around the Earth. When the smallest objects of artificial space debris (paint flecks, solid rocket exhaust particles, etc.) are grouped with micrometeoroids, they are together sometimes referred to by space agencies as MMOD (Micrometeoroid and Orbital Debris).
Collisions with debris have become a hazard to spacecraft. The smallest objects cause damage akin to sandblasting, especially to solar panels and optics like telescopes or star trackers that cannot easily be protected by a ballistic shield.
Below 2,000 km (1,200 mi), pieces of debris are denser than meteoroids. Most are dust from solid rocket motors, surface erosion debris like paint flakes, and frozen coolant from Soviet nuclear-powered satellites. For comparison, the International Space Station (ISS) orbits in the 300–400 kilometres (190–250 mi) range, while the two most recent large debris events, the 2007 Chinese antisatellite weapon test and the 2009 satellite collision, occurred at 800 to 900 kilometres (500 to 560 mi) altitude. The ISS has Whipple shielding to resist damage from small MMOD. However, known debris with a collision chance over 1/10,000 are avoided by maneuvering the station.
According to a report published in January 2025, scientists are encouraging vigilance around closing airspace more often to avoid collisions between airline flights and space debris reentering the earth's atmosphere amid an increasing volume of both. Following a destructive event, the explosion of SpaceX's Starship Flight 7 on January 16, 2025, the US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) slowed air traffic in the area where debris was falling. This prompted several aircraft to request diversion because of low fuel levels while they were holding outside the Debris Response Area.

== History ==

Space debris began to accumulate in Earth orbit with the launch of the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1, launched into orbit in October 1957. But even before this event, humans might have produced ejecta that became space debris, as in the August 1957 Pascal B test. Space debris for example was ejected in 1957 purposefully from an Aerobee launch system in a likely failed attempt to reach for the first time escape velocity from Earth, and therefore space beyond Earth. Going back further, natural ejecta from Earth has entered orbit.
After the launch of Sputnik, the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) began compiling a database (the Space Object Catalog) of all known rocket launches and objects reaching orbit, including satellites, protective shields and upper-stages of launch vehicles. NASA later published modified versions of the database in two-line element sets, and beginning in the early 1980s, they were republished in the CelesTrak bulletin board system.

NORAD trackers who fed the database were aware of other objects in orbit, many of which were the result of in-orbit explosions. Some were deliberately caused during anti-satellite weapon (ASAT) testing in the 1960s, and others were the result of rocket stages blowing up in orbit as leftover propellant expanded and ruptured their tanks. More detailed databases and tracking systems were gradually developed, including Gabbard diagrams, to improve the modeling of orbital evolution and decay.
When the NORAD database became publicly available during the 1970s, techniques developed for the asteroid-belt were applied to the study of known artificial satellite objects.
Time and natural gravitational/atmospheric effects help to clear space debris. A variety of technological approaches have also been proposed, though most have not been implemented. A number of scholars have observed that systemic factors, political, legal, economic, and cultural, are the greatest impediment to the cleanup of near-Earth space. There has been little commercial incentive to reduce space debris since the associated cost does not accrue to the entity producing it. Rather, the cost falls to all users of the space environment who benefit from space technology and knowledge. A number of suggestions for increasing incentives to reduce space debris have been made. These would encourage companies to see the economic benefit of reducing debris more aggressively than existing government mandates require. In 1979, NASA founded the Orbital Debris Program to research mitigation measures for space debris in Earth orbit.

=== Debris growth ===

During the 1980s, NASA and other US groups attempted to limit the growth of debris. One trial solution was implemented by McDonnell Douglas in 1981 for the Delta launch vehicle by having the booster move away from its payload and vent any propellant remaining in its tanks. This eliminated one source for pressure buildup in the tanks which had previously caused them to explode and create additional orbital debris. Other countries were slower to adopt this measure and, due especially to a number of launches by the Soviet Union, the problem grew throughout the decade.
A new battery of studies followed as NASA, NORAD, and others attempted to better understand the orbital environment, with each adjusting the number of pieces of debris in the critical-mass zone upward. Although in 1981 (when Schefter's article was published) the number of objects was estimated at 5,000, new detectors in the Ground-based Electro-Optical Deep Space Surveillance system found new objects. By the late 1990s, it was thought that most of the 28,000 launched objects had already decayed and about 8,500 remained in orbit. By 2005 this was adjusted upward to 13,000 objects remaining in orbit, and a 2006 study increased the number to 19,000 as a result of an ASAT and a satellite collision. In 2011, NASA said that 22,000 objects were being tracked.
A 2006 NASA model suggested that if no new launches took place, the environment would retain the then-known population until about 2055, when it would increase on its own. Richard Crowther of Britain's Defence Evaluation and Research Agency said in 2002 that he believed the cascade would begin about 2015. The US National Academy of Sciences, summarizing the professional view, noted widespread agreement that two bands of LEO space – 900 to 1,000 km (620 mi) and 1,500 km (930 mi) – were already past critical density.
In the 2009 CEAS European Air and Space Conference, University of Southampton researcher Hugh Lewis predicted that the threat from space debris would rise 50 percent in the next decade and quadruple in the next 50 years. As of 2009, more than 13,000 close calls were tracked weekly.
A 2011 report by the US National Research Council warned NASA that the amount of orbiting space debris was at a critical level. According to some computer models, the amount of space debris "has reached a tipping point, with enough currently in orbit to continually collide and create even more debris, raising the risk of spacecraft failures." The report called for international regulations limiting debris and research of disposal methods.

==== Debris history in particular years ====
By mid-1994 there had been 68 breakups or debris "anomalous events" involving satellites launched by the former Soviet Union/Russia and 18 similar events had been discovered involving rocket bodies and other propulsion-related operational debris.
As of 2009, 19,000 pieces of debris over 5 cm (2 in) were tracked by the United States Space Surveillance Network.
As of July 2013, estimates of more than 170 million pieces of debris smaller than 1 cm (0.4 in), about 670,000 pieces 1–10 cm, and approximately 29,000 larger pieces were in orbit.
As of July 2016, nearly 18,000 artificial objects were orbiting above Earth, including 1,419 operational satellites.
As of October 2019, nearly 20,000 artificial objects were in orbit above the Earth, including 2,218 operational satellites.

== Characterization ==

=== Size and numbers ===
As of January 2019 there were estimated to be over 128 million pieces of debris smaller than 1 cm (0.39 in), and approximately 900,000 pieces between 1 and 10 cm. The count of large debris (defined as 10 cm across or larger) was 34,000 in 2019, and at least 37,000 by June 2023. The technical measurement cut-off is c. 3 mm (0.12 in).
As of 2020, there were 8,000 metric tons of debris in orbit, a figure that is expected to increase.

=== Low Earth orbit ===

In the orbits nearest to Earth – less than 2,000 km (1,200 mi) orbital altitude, referred to as low-Earth orbit (LEO) – there have traditionally been few "universal orbits" that keep a number of spacecraft in particular rings (in contrast to GEO, a single orbit that is widely used by over 500 satellites). There is currently 85% pollution in LEO (Low Earth Orbit). This was beginning to change in 2019, and several companies began to deploy the early phases of satellite internet constellations, which will have many universal orbits in LEO with 30 to 50 satellites per orbital plane and altitude. Traditionally, the most populated LEO orbits have been a number of Sun-synchronous satellites that keep a constant angle between the Sun and the orbital plane, making Earth observation easier with consistent sun angle and lighting. Sun-synchronous orbits are polar, meaning they cross over the polar regions. LEO satellites orbit in many planes, typically up to 15 times a day, causing frequent approaches between objects. The density of satellites – both active and derelict – is much higher in LEO.
Orbits are affected by gravitational perturbations (which in LEO include unevenness of the Earth's gravitational field due to variations in the density of the planet), and collisions can occur from any direction. The average impact speed of collisions in Low Earth Orbit is 10 km/s with maximums reaching above 14 km/s due to orbital eccentricity. The 2009 satellite collision occurred at a closing speed of 11.7 km/s (26,000 mph), creating over 2,000 large debris fragments. These debris cross many other orbits and increase debris collision risk.
It is theorized that a sufficiently large collision of spacecraft could potentially lead to a cascade effect, or even make some particular low Earth orbits effectively unusable for long term use by orbiting satellites, a phenomenon known as the Kessler syndrome. The theoretical effect is projected to be a theoretical runaway chain reaction of collisions that could occur, exponentially increasing the number and density of space debris in low-Earth orbit, and has been hypothesized to ensue beyond some critical density.
Crewed space missions are mostly at 400 km (250 mi) altitude and below, where air drag helps clear zones of fragments. The upper atmosphere is not a fixed density at any particular orbital altitude; it varies as a result of atmospheric tides and expands or contracts over longer time periods as a result of space weather. These longer-term effects can increase drag at lower altitudes; the 1990s expansion was a factor in reduced debris density. Another factor was fewer launches by Russia; the Soviet Union made most of their launches in the 1970s and 1980s.

=== Higher altitudes ===

At higher altitudes, where air drag is less significant, orbital decay takes longer. Slight atmospheric drag, lunar perturbations, Earth's gravity perturbations, solar wind, and solar radiation pressure can gradually bring debris to lower altitudes (where it decays), but at very high altitudes this may take centuries. Although high-altitude orbits are less commonly used than LEO and the onset of the problem is slower, the numbers progress toward the critical threshold more quickly.
Many communications satellites are in geostationary orbits (GEO), clustering over specific targets and sharing the same orbital path. Although velocities are low between GEO objects, when a satellite becomes derelict (such as Telstar 401) it assumes a geosynchronous orbit; its orbital inclination increases about 0.8° and its speed increases about 160 km/h (99 mph) per year. Impact velocity peaks at about 1.5 km/s (0.93 mi/s). Orbital perturbations cause longitude drift of the inoperable spacecraft and precession of the orbital plane. Close approaches (within 50 meters) are estimated at one per year. The collision debris pose less short-term risk than from a LEO collision, but the satellite would likely become inoperable. Large objects, such as solar-power satellites, are especially vulnerable to collisions.
Although the ITU now requires proof a satellite can be moved out of its orbital slot at the end of its lifespan, studies suggest this is insufficient. Since GEO orbit is too distant to accurately measure objects under 1 m (3 ft 3 in), the nature of the problem is not well known. Satellites could be moved to empty spots in GEO, requiring less maneuvering and making it easier to predict future motion. Satellites or boosters in other orbits, especially stranded in geostationary transfer orbit, are an additional concern due to their typically high crossing velocity.
Despite efforts to reduce risk, spacecraft collisions have occurred. The European Space Agency telecom satellite Olympus-1 was struck by a meteoroid on 11 August 1993 and eventually moved to a graveyard orbit. On 29 March 2006, the Russian Express-AM11 communications satellite was struck by an unknown object and rendered inoperable; its engineers had enough contact time with the satellite to send it into a graveyard orbit.

== Sources ==

=== Dead spacecraft ===

In 1958, the United States launched Vanguard I into a medium Earth orbit (MEO). As of October 2009, it, the upper stage of Vanguard 1's launch rocket and associated piece of debris, are the oldest surviving artificial space objects still in orbit and are expected to be until after the year 2250. As of May 2022, the Union of Concerned Scientists listed 5,465 operational satellites from a known population of 27,000 pieces of orbital debris tracked by NORAD.
Occasionally satellites are left in orbit when they are no longer useful. Many countries require that satellites go through passivation at the end of their life. The satellites are then either boosted into a higher, graveyard orbit or a lower, short-term orbit. Nonetheless, satellites that have been properly moved to a higher orbit have an eight-percent probability of puncture and coolant release over a 50-year period. The coolant freezes into droplets of solid sodium-potassium alloy, creating more debris.
Despite the use of passivation, or prior to its standardization, many satellites and rocket bodies have exploded or broken apart in orbit. In February 2015, for example, the USAF Defense Meteorological Satellite Program Flight 13 (DMSP-F13) exploded in orbit, creating at least 149 debris objects, which were expected to remain in orbit for decades. Later that same year, NOAA-16, which had been decommissioned after an anomaly in June 2014, broke apart in orbit into at least 275 pieces. For older programs, such as the Soviet-era Meteor 2 and Kosmos satellites, design flaws resulted in numerous break-ups – at least 68 by 1994 – following decommissioning, resulting in more debris.

=== Lost equipment ===
Space debris includes a glove lost by astronaut Ed White on the first American spacewalk (aka EVA), a camera lost by Michael Collins near Gemini 10, a thermal blanket lost during STS-88, garbage bags jettisoned by Soviet cosmonauts during Mir's 15-year life, a wrench, and a toothbrush. Sunita Williams of STS-116 lost a camera during an EVA. During an STS-120 EVA to reinforce a torn solar panel, a pair of pliers was lost, and in an STS-126 EVA, Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper lost a briefcase-sized tool bag.

=== Boosters ===

A significant portion of debris is due to rocket upper stages (e.g. the Inertial Upper Stage) breaking up due to decomposition of unvented fuel. The first such instance involved the launch of the Transit-4a satellite in 1961. Two hours after insertion into orbit, the Ablestar upper stage exploded. Even boosters that do not break apart can be a problem. A major known impact event involved an intact Ariane booster.
Although NASA and the United States Air Force now require upper-stage passivation, other launchers – such as the Chinese and Russian space agencies – do not. Lower stages, like the Space Shuttle's solid rocket boosters or the Apollo program's Saturn IB launch vehicles, do not reach orbit.
Examples:

Two Japanese H-2A rockets broke up in 2006.
A Russian Briz-M booster stage exploded in orbit over South Australia on 19 February 2007. Launched on 28 February 2006 carrying an Arabsat-4A communications satellite, it malfunctioned before it could use up its propellant. Although the explosion was captured on film by astronomers, due to the orbit path the debris cloud has been difficult to measure with radar. By 21 February 2007, over 1,000 fragments were identified. A 14 February 2007 breakup was recorded by Celestrak.
Another Briz-M broke up on 16 October 2012 after a failed 6 August Proton-M launch. The amount and size of the debris was unknown.
The second stage of the Zenit-2, called the SL-16 by western governments, along with the second stages of the Vostok and Kosmos launch vehicles, make up about 20% of the total mass of launch debris in Low Earth Orbit (LEO). An analysis that determined the 50 "statistically most concerning" debris objects in low Earth orbit determined that the top 20 were all Zenit-2 upper stages.
A Delta II rocket used to launch NASA's 1989 COBE spacecraft exploded on December 3, 2006. This occurred even though its residual fuel had already been vented to space.
In 2018–2019, three different Atlas V Centaur second stages broke up.
In December 2020, scientists confirmed that a previously detected near-Earth object, 2020 SO, was rocket booster space junk launched in 1966 orbiting Earth and the Sun.
At least eight Delta rockets have contributed orbital debris in the Sun-synchronous low Earth orbit environment. The variant of the Delta upper stage that was used in the 1970s was found to be prone to in-orbit explosions. Starting in 1981, depletion burns – to get rid of excess propellant – became standard and no Delta Rocket Bodies launched after 1981 experienced severe fragmentations afterward, but some of those launched prior to 1981 continued to explode. In 1991, the Delta 1975-052B fragmented, 16 years after launch, demonstrating the resilience of the propellent.

=== Weapons ===

In addition to the accidental creation of debris, some has been made intentionally through the deliberate destruction of satellites. This has been done as a test of anti-satellite or anti-ballistic missile technology, or to prevent a sensitive satellite from being examined by a foreign power. The United States has conducted over 30 anti-satellite weapons tests (ASATs), the Soviet Union/Russia has performed at least 27, China has performed 10 and India has performed at least one. The most recent ASATs were the Chinese interception of FY-1C, Russian trials of its PL-19 Nudol, the American interception of USA-193 and India's interception of an unstated live satellite.
A former source of debris was anti-satellite weapons (ASATs) testing by the US and Soviet Union during the 1960s and 1970s. North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) only collected data for Soviet tests, and debris from US tests were identified subsequently. By the time the debris problem was understood, widespread ASAT testing had ended. The US Program 437 was shut down in 1975.
The US restarted their ASAT programs in the 1980s with the Vought ASM-135 ASAT. A 1985 test destroyed a 1-tonne (2,200 lb) satellite orbiting at 525 km (326 mi), creating thousands of pieces of debris larger than 1 cm (0.39 in). At this altitude, atmospheric drag decayed the orbit of most of the debris within a decade. A de facto moratorium followed the test.

China's government was condemned for the military implications and the amount of debris from a 2007 anti-satellite missile test, the largest single space debris incident in history (creating over 2,300 pieces golf-ball size or larger, over 35,000 1 cm (0.4 in) or larger, and one million pieces 1 mm (0.04 in) or larger). The target satellite orbited between 850 km (530 mi) and 882 km (548 mi), the portion of near-Earth space most densely populated with satellites. Since atmospheric drag is low at that altitude, the debris is slow to return to Earth, and in June 2007 NASA's Terra environmental spacecraft maneuvered to avoid impact from the debris. Brian Weeden, a US Air Force officer and Secure World Foundation staff member, noted that the 2007 Chinese satellite explosion created more than 3,000 separate objects of orbital debris that then required tracking.
On 20 February 2008, the US launched an SM-3 missile from the USS Lake Erie to destroy a defective US spy satellite thought to be carrying 450 kg (1,000 lb) of toxic hydrazine propellant. The event occurred at about 250 km (155 mi). The missile was aimed to minimize the amount of debris, which (according to Pentagon Strategic Command chief Kevin Chilton) had decayed by early 2009.
On 27 March 2019, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced that India shot down one of its own LEO satellites with a ground-based missile. He stated that the operation, part of Mission Shakti, would defend the country's interests in space. Afterwards, US Air Force Space Command announced they were tracking 270 new pieces of debris but expected the number to grow as data collection continues.
On 15 November 2021, the Russian Defense Ministry destroyed Kosmos 1408 orbiting at around 450 km, creating "more than 1,500 pieces of trackable debris and hundreds of thousands of pieces of un-trackable debris" according to the US State Department.

== Hazards ==

=== To spacecraft ===

Space junk can be a hazard to active satellites and spacecraft. It has been suggested that Earth orbit could even become impassable if the risk of collision becomes too great, a phenomenon known as Kessler syndrome.
However, since the risk to spacecraft increases with exposure to high debris densities, it is more accurate to say that LEO would be rendered unusable by orbiting craft. The threat to craft passing through LEO to reach a higher orbit would be much lower owing to the short time span of the crossing.

==== Uncrewed spacecraft ====

Although spacecraft are typically protected by Whipple shields, solar panels, which are exposed to the Sun, wear from low-mass impacts. Even small impacts can produce a cloud of plasma which is an electrical risk to the panels.
Satellites are believed to have been destroyed by micrometeorites and small orbital debris (MMOD). The earliest suspected loss was of Kosmos 1275, which disappeared on 24 July 1981, a month after launch. Kosmos contained no volatile fuel, therefore, there appeared to be nothing internal to the satellite which could have caused the destructive explosion. However, the case has not been proven and another hypothesis forwarded is that the battery exploded. Tracking showed it broke into 300 objects.
Many impacts have been confirmed since. For example, on 24 July 1996, the French microsatellite Cerise was hit by fragments of an Ariane 1 H-10 upper-stage booster which exploded in November 1986. On 29 March 2006, the Russian Ekspress-AM11 communications satellite was struck by an unknown object and rendered inoperable. On 13 October 2009, Terra suffered a single battery cell failure anomaly and a battery heater control anomaly which were subsequently considered likely the result of an MMOD strike. On 12 March 2010, Aura lost power from one-half of one of its 11 solar panels which was attributed to an MMOD strike. On 22 May 2013, GOES 13 was hit by an MMOD which caused it to lose track of the stars that it used to maintain an operational attitude. It took nearly a month for the spacecraft to return to operation.
The first major satellite collision occurred on 10 February 2009. The 950 kg (2,090 lb) derelict satellite Kosmos 2251 and the operational 560 kg (1,230 lb) Iridium 33 collided, 500 mi (800 km) over northern Siberia. The relative speed of impact was about 11.7 km/s (7.3 mi/s), or about 42,120 km/h (26,170 mph). Both satellites were destroyed, creating thousands of pieces of new smaller debris, with legal and political liability issues unresolved even years later.
On 22 January 2013, BLITS (a Russian laser-ranging satellite) was struck by debris suspected to be from the 2007 Chinese anti-satellite missile test, changing both its orbit and rotation rate.
Satellites sometimes perform Collision Avoidance Maneuvers and satellite operators may monitor space debris as part of maneuver planning. For example, in January 2017, the European Space Agency altered the orbit of one of its three Swarm mission spacecraft, based on data from the US Joint Space Operations Center, to lower the risk of collision from Cosmos-375, a derelict Russian satellite.

==== Crewed spacecraft ====
Crewed flights are particularly vulnerable to space debris conjunctions in the orbital path of the spacecraft. Occasional avoidance maneuvers or longer-term space debris wear have affected the Space Shuttle, the MIR space station, and the International Space Station.

===== Space Shuttle missions =====

From the early shuttle missions, NASA used NORAD space monitoring capabilities to assess the shuttle's orbital path for debris. In the 1980s, this consumed a large proportion of NORAD capacity. The first collision-avoidance maneuver occurred during STS-48, in September 1991; a seven-second thruster burn to avoid debris from the derelict satellite Kosmos 955. Similar maneuvers were executed on missions 53, 72 and 82.
One of the earliest events to publicize the debris problem occurred on Space Shuttle Challenger's second flight, STS-7. A fleck of paint struck its front window, creating a pit over 1 mm (0.04 in) wide. On STS-59 in 1994, Endeavour's front window was pitted about half its depth. Minor debris impacts increased from 1998.
Window chipping and minor damage to thermal protection system tiles (TPS) were already common by the 1990s. The Shuttle was later flown tail-first to take a greater proportion of the debris load on the engines and rear cargo bay, which are not used in orbit or during descent, and thus are less critical for post-launch operation. When flying attached to the ISS, a shuttle was flipped around so the better-armoured station shielded the orbiter.
A NASA 2005 study concluded that debris accounted for approximately half of the overall risk to the Shuttle. An executive-level decision to proceed was required if the catastrophic impact was more likely than 1 in 200. On a normal (low-orbit) mission to the ISS, the risk was approximately 1 in 300, but the Hubble telescope repair mission was flown at the higher orbital altitude of 560 km (350 mi) where the risk was initially calculated at a 1-in-185 (due in part to the 2009 satellite collision). A re-analysis with better debris numbers reduced the estimated risk to 1 in 221, and the mission went ahead.
Debris incidents continued on later Shuttle missions. During STS-115 in 2006, a fragment of circuit board bored a small hole through the radiator panels in the US space shuttle Atlantis cargo bay. On STS-118 in 2007, debris blew a bullet-like hole through the US space shuttle Endeavour radiator panel.

===== Mir =====
Impact wear was notable on the Soviet space station Mir, since it remained in space for long periods with its original solar module panels.

===== International Space Station =====
The ISS also uses Whipple shielding to protect its interior from minor debris. However, exterior portions (notably its solar panels) cannot be protected easily. In 1999, the ISS panels were predicted to degrade approximately 0.23% in four years due to the "sandblasting" effect of impacts with small orbital debris. An avoidance maneuver is typically performed for the ISS if "there is a greater than a one-in-10,000 chance of a debris strike". As of January 2014, there have been sixteen maneuvers in the fifteen years the ISS had been in orbit. By 2019, over 1,400 meteoroid and orbital debris (MMOD) impacts had been recorded on the ISS.
As another method to reduce the risk to humans on board, ISS operational management asked the crew to shelter in the Soyuz on three occasions due to late debris-proximity warnings. In addition to the sixteen thruster firings and three Soyuz-capsule shelter orders, one attempted maneuver was not completed due to not having the several days' warning necessary to upload the maneuver timeline to the station's computer. A March 2009 event involved debris believed to be a 10 cm (3.9 in) piece of the Kosmos 1275 satellite. In 2013, the ISS operations management did not make a maneuver to avoid any debris, after making a record four debris maneuvers the previous year.

==== Kessler syndrome ====

The Kessler syndrome, proposed by NASA scientist Donald J. Kessler in 1978, is a theoretical scenario in which the density of objects in low Earth orbit (LEO) is high enough that collisions between objects could cause a cascade effect where each collision generates space debris that increases the likelihood of further collisions. He further theorized that one implication, if this were to occur, is that the distribution of debris in orbit could render space activities and the use of satellites in specific orbital ranges economically impractical for many generations.
The growth in the number of objects as a result of the late-1990s studies sparked debate in the space community on the nature of the problem and the earlier dire warnings. According to Kessler's 1991 derivation and 2001 updates, the LEO environment in the 1,000 km (620 mi) altitude range should be cascading. However, only one major satellite collision incident occurred: the 2009 satellite collision between Iridium 33 and Kosmos 2251. The lack of obvious short-term cascading has led to speculation that the original estimates overstated the problem. According to Kessler in 2010, however, a cascade may not be obvious until it is well advanced, which might take years.

=== On Earth ===

Although most debris burns up in the atmosphere, larger debris objects can reach the ground. According to NASA, an average of one cataloged piece of debris has fallen back to Earth each day for the past 50 years. Despite their size, there has been no significant property damage from the debris. Burning up in the atmosphere contributes to air pollution. Numerous small cylindrical tanks from space objects have been found, designed to hold fuel or gasses.

== Tracking and measurement ==

=== Tracking from the ground ===
Radar and optical detectors such as lidar are the main tools for tracking space debris. Although objects under 10 cm (4 in) have reduced orbital stability, debris as small as 1 cm can be tracked, however determining orbits to allow re-acquisition is difficult. Most debris remain unobserved. The NASA Orbital Debris Observatory tracked space debris with a 3 m (10 ft) liquid mirror transit telescope. FM Radio waves can detect debris, after reflecting off them onto a receiver. Optical tracking may be a useful early-warning system on spacecraft.
The US Strategic Command keeps a catalog of known orbital objects, using ground-based radar and telescopes, and a space-based telescope (originally to distinguish from hostile missiles). The 2009 edition listed about 19,000 objects. Other data come from the ESA Space Debris Telescope, TIRA, the Goldstone, Haystack, and EISCAT radars and the Cobra Dane phased array radar, to be used in debris-environment models like the ESA Meteoroid and Space Debris Terrestrial Environment Reference (MASTER).

=== Measurement in space ===

Returned space hardware is a valuable source of information on the directional distribution and composition of the (sub-millimetre) debris flux. The LDEF satellite deployed by mission STS-41-C Challenger and retrieved by STS-32 Columbia spent 68 months in orbit to gather debris data. The EURECA satellite, deployed by STS-46 Atlantis in 1992 and retrieved by STS-57 Endeavour in 1993, was also used for debris study.
The solar arrays of the Hubble space telescope were returned by missions STS-61 Endeavour and STS-109 Columbia, and the impact craters were studied by the ESA to validate its models. Materials returned from Mir were also studied, notably the Mir Environmental Effects Payload (which also tested materials intended for the ISS).

=== Gabbard diagrams ===

A debris cloud resulting from a single event is studied with scatter plots known as Gabbard diagrams, where the perigee and apogee of fragments are plotted with respect to their orbital period. Gabbard diagrams of the early debris cloud prior to the effects of perturbations, if the data were available, are reconstructed. They often include data on newly observed, as yet uncatalogued fragments. Gabbard diagrams can provide insights into the features of the fragmentation, the direction and point of impact.

== Dealing with debris ==

An average of about one tracked object per day has been dropping out of orbit for the past 50 years, averaging almost three objects per day at solar maximum (due to the heating and expansion of the Earth's atmosphere creating more drag), but one about every three days at solar minimum, usually five and a half years later. In addition to natural atmospheric effects, corporations, academics and government agencies have proposed plans and technology to deal with space debris, but as of November 2014, most of these are theoretical, and there is no business plan for debris reduction.
A number of scholars have also observed that institutional factors – political, legal, economic, and cultural "rules of the game" – are the greatest impediment to the cleanup of near-Earth space. There is little commercial incentive to act, since costs are not assigned to polluters, though a number of technological solutions have been suggested. However, effects to date are limited. In the US, governmental bodies have been accused of backsliding on previous commitments to limit debris growth, "let alone tackling the more complex issues of removing orbital debris." The different methods for removal of space debris have been evaluated by the Space Generation Advisory Council, including French astrophysicist Fatoumata Kébé.
In May 2024, a NASA report from the Office of Technology, Policy, and Strategy introduced new methods for addressing orbital debris. The report, titled Cost and Benefit Analysis of Mitigating, Tracking, and Remediating Orbital Debris, provided a comprehensive analysis comparing the cost-effectiveness of over ten different actions, including shielding spacecraft, tracking smaller debris, and removing large debris. By evaluating these measures in economic terms, the study aims to inform cost-effective strategies for debris management, highlighting that methods like rapid deorbiting of defunct spacecraft can significantly reduce risks in space.

=== National and international regulation ===

There is no international treaty minimizing space debris. However, the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS) published voluntary guidelines in 2007, using a variety of earlier national regulatory attempts at developing standards for debris mitigation. As of 2008, the committee was discussing international "rules of the road" to prevent collisions between satellites. By 2013, a number of national legal regimes existed, typically instantiated in the launch licenses that are required for a launch in all spacefaring nations.
The US issued a set of standard practices for civilian (NASA) and military (DoD and USAF) orbital-debris mitigation in 2001. The standard envisioned disposal for final mission orbits in one of three ways: 1) atmospheric reentry where even with "conservative projections for solar activity, atmospheric drag will limit the lifetime to no longer than 25 years after completion of mission;" 2) maneuver to a "storage orbit:" move the spacecraft to one of four very broad parking orbit ranges (2,000–19,700 km (1,200–12,200 mi), 20,700–35,300 km (12,900–21,900 mi), above 36,100 km (22,400 mi), or out of Earth orbit completely and into any heliocentric orbit; 3) "Direct retrieval: Retrieve the structure and remove it from orbit as soon as practicable after completion of mission." The standard articulated in option 1, which is the standard applicable to most satellites and derelict upper stages, has come to be known as the "25-year rule". The US updated the Orbital Debris Mitigation Standard Practices in December 2019, but made no change to the 25-year rule even though "any in the space community believe that the timeframe should be less than 25 years." There is no consensus however on what any new timeframe might be.
In 2002, the European Space Agency (ESA) worked with an international group to promulgate a similar set of standards, also with a "25-year rule" applying to most Earth-orbit satellites and upper stages. Space agencies in Europe began to develop technical guidelines in the mid-1990s, and ASI, UKSA, CNES, DLR and ESA signed a "European Code of Conduct" in 2006, which was a predecessor standard to the ISO international standard work that would begin the following year. In 2008, ESA further developed "its own "Requirements on Space Debris Mitigation for Agency Projects" which "came into force on 1 April 2008."
Germany and France have posted bonds to safeguard property from debris damage. The "direct retrieval" option (option no. 3 in the US "standard practices" above) has rarely been done by any spacefaring nation (exception, USAF X-37) or commercial actor since the earliest days of spaceflight due to the cost and complexity of achieving direct retrieval, but the ESA has scheduled a 2026 demonstration mission (ClearSpace-1) to do this with a single small 94 kg (207 lb) satellite (PROBA-1) at a projected cost of €120 million not including the launch costs.
By 2006, the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) had developed a number of technical means of debris mitigation (upper stage passivation, propellant reserves for movement to graveyard orbits, etc.) for ISRO launch vehicles and satellites, and was actively contributing to inter-agency debris coordination and the efforts of the UN COPUOS committee.
In 2007, the ISO began preparing an international standard for space-debris mitigation. By 2010, ISO had published "a comprehensive set of space system engineering standards aimed at mitigating space debris.  defined in the top-level standard, ISO 24113." By 2017, the standards were nearly complete. However, these standards are not binding on any party by ISO or any international jurisdiction. They are simply available for use in voluntary ways. They "can be adopted voluntarily by a spacecraft manufacturer or operator, or brought into effect through a commercial contract between a customer and supplier, or used as the basis for establishing a set of national regulations on space debris mitigation."

The voluntary ISO standard also adopted the "25-year rule" for the "LEO protected region" below 2,000 km (1,200 mi) altitude that has been previously (and still is, as of 2019) used by the US, ESA, and UN mitigation standards, and identifies it as "an upper limit for the amount of time that a space system shall remain in orbit after its mission is completed. Ideally, the time to deorbit should be as short as possible (i.e., much shorter than 25 years)".
Holger Krag of the ESA states that as of 2017 there is no binding international regulatory framework with no progress occurring at the respective UN body in Vienna.

=== Growth mitigation ===

As of the 2010s, several technical approaches to the mitigation of the growth of space debris are typically undertaken, yet no comprehensive legal regime or cost assignment structure is in place to reduce space debris in the way that terrestrial pollution has reduced since the mid-20th century.
International mitigation guidance has been published to reduce the creation of new debris, including recommendations to minimize debris released during normal operations, prevent on-orbit breakups, and perform post-mission disposal and collision-avoidance planning. NASA has also published detailed engineering guidance for limiting orbital debris as part of its technical standards documentation.
To avoid excessive creation of artificial space debris, many – but not all – satellites launched to above-low-Earth-orbit are launched initially into elliptical orbits with perigees inside Earth's atmosphere so the orbit will quickly decay and the satellites then will be destroyed upon reentry into the atmosphere. Other methods are used for spacecraft in higher orbits. These include passivation of the spacecraft at the end of its useful life; as well as the use of upper stages that can reignite to decelerate the stage to intentionally deorbit it, often on the first or second orbit following payload release; satellites that can, if they remain healthy for years, deorbit themselves from the lower orbits around Earth. Other satellites (such as many CubeSats) in low orbits below approximately 400 km (250 mi) orbital altitude depend on the energy-absorbing effects of the upper atmosphere to reliably deorbit a spacecraft within weeks or months.
Increasingly, spent upper stages in higher orbits – orbits for which low-delta-v deorbit is not possible, or not planned for – and architectures that support satellite passivation, are passivated at end of life. This removes any internal energy contained in the vehicle at the end of its mission or useful life. While this does not remove the debris of the now derelict rocket stage or satellite itself, it does substantially reduce the likelihood of the spacecraft destructing and creating many smaller pieces of space debris, a phenomenon that was common in many of the early generations of US and Soviet spacecraft.
Upper stage passivation (e.g. of Delta boosters) achieved by releasing residual propellants reduces debris from orbital explosions; however even as late as 2011, not all upper stages implement this practice. SpaceX used the term "propulsive passivation" for the final maneuver of their six-hour demonstration mission (STP-2) of the Falcon 9 second stage for the US Air Force in 2019, but did not define what all that term encompassed.
With a "one-up, one-down" launch-license policy for Earth orbits, launchers would rendezvous with, capture, and de-orbit a derelict satellite from approximately the same orbital plane. Another possibility is the robotic refueling of satellites. Experiments have been flown by NASA, and SpaceX is developing large-scale on-orbit propellant transfer technology.
Another approach to debris mitigation is to explicitly design the mission architecture to leave the rocket second-stage in an elliptical geocentric orbit with a low-perigee, thus ensuring rapid orbital decay and avoiding long-term orbital debris from spent rocket bodies. Such missions will often complete the payload placement in a final orbit by the use of low-thrust electric propulsion or with the use of a small kick stage to circularize the orbit. The kick stage itself may be designed with the excess-propellant capability to be able to self-deorbit.

=== Self-removal ===
Although the ITU requires geostationary satellites to move to a graveyard orbit at the end of their lives, the selected orbital areas do not sufficiently protect GEO lanes from debris. Rocket stages (or satellites) with enough propellant may make a direct, controlled de-orbit, or if this would require too much propellant, a satellite may be brought to an orbit where atmospheric drag would cause it to eventually de-orbit. This was done with the French Spot-1 satellite, reducing its atmospheric re-entry time from a projected 200 years to about 15 by lowering its altitude from 830 km (516 mi) to about 550 km (342 mi).
The Iridium constellation – 95 communication satellites launched during the five-year period between 1997 and 2002 – provides a set of data points on the limits of self-removal. The satellite operator – Iridium Communications – remained operational over the two-decade life of the satellites (albeit with a company name change through a corporate bankruptcy during the period) and, by December 2019, had "completed disposal of the last of its 65 working legacy satellites." However, this process left 30 satellites with a combined mass of (20,400 kg (45,000 lb), or nearly a third of the mass of this constellation) in LEO orbits at approximately 700 km (430 mi) altitude, where self-decay is slow. Of these satellites, 29 simply failed during their time in orbit and were thus unable to self-deorbit, while one – Iridium 33 – was involved in the 2009 satellite collision with the derelict Russian military satellite Kosmos-2251. No contingency plan was laid for the removal of satellites that were unable to remove themselves. In 2019, the CEO of Iridium, Matt Desch, said that Iridium would be willing to pay an active-debris-removal company to deorbit its remaining first-generation satellites if it were possible for an unrealistically low cost, say "US$10,000 per deorbit, but  acknowledged that price would likely be far below what a debris-removal company could realistically offer. 'You know at what point  a no-brainer, but  expect the cost is really in the millions or tens of millions , at which price I know it doesn't make sense.'"
Passive methods of increasing the orbital decay rate of spacecraft debris have been proposed. Instead of rockets, an electrodynamic tether could be attached to a spacecraft at launch; at the end of its lifetime, the tether would be rolled out to slow the spacecraft. Other proposals include a booster stage with a sail-like attachment and a large, thin, inflatable balloon envelope.
In late December 2022, ESA successfully carried out a demonstration of a breaking sail-based satellite deorbiter, ADEO, which could be used by mitigation measures and is part of ESA's Zero Debris Initiative. Around one year earlier, China also tested a drag sail.

=== External removal ===
A variety of approaches have been proposed, studied, or had ground subsystems built to use other spacecraft to remove existing space debris.
A consensus of speakers at a meeting in Brussels, Belgium in October 2012, organized by the US think tank Secure World Foundation and the French International Relations Institute, reported that removal of the largest debris would be required to prevent the risk to spacecraft becoming unacceptable in the foreseeable future (without adding to the inventory of dead spacecraft in LEO). As of 2019, removal costs and legal questions about ownership and the authority to remove defunct satellites have stymied national or international action. Current space law retains ownership of all satellites with their original operators, even debris or spacecraft which are defunct or threaten active missions.
Multiple companies made plans in the late 2010s to conduct external removal of their satellites in mid-LEO orbits. For example, OneWeb planned to use onboard self-removal as "plan A" for satellite deorbiting at the end of life, but if a satellite were unable to remove itself within one year of end of life, OneWeb would implement "plan B" and dispatch a reusable (multi-transport mission) space tug to attach to the satellite at an already built-in capture target via a grappling fixture, to be towed to a lower orbit and released for re-entry.

==== Remotely controlled vehicles ====
A well-studied solution uses a remotely controlled vehicle to rendezvous with, capture and detumble, and return debris to a central station. One such system is Space Infrastructure Servicing (SIS), a commercially developed refueling depot and service spacecraft for communications satellites in geosynchronous orbit originally scheduled for a 2015 launch. The SIS would be able to "push dead satellites into graveyard orbits." The Advanced Common Evolved Stage family of upper stages is being designed with a high leftover-propellant margin (for derelict capture and de-orbit) and in-space refueling capability for the high delta-v required to de-orbit heavy objects from geosynchronous orbit. A tug-like satellite to drag debris to a safe altitude for it to burn up in the atmosphere has been researched. When debris is identified the satellite creates a difference in potential between the debris and itself, then using its thrusters to move itself and the debris to a safer orbit.
A variation of this approach is for the remotely controlled vehicle to rendezvous with debris, capture it temporarily to attach a smaller de-orbit satellite and drag the debris with a tether to the desired location. The "mothership" would then tow the debris-smallsat combination for atmospheric entry or move it to a graveyard orbit. One such system is the proposed Busek ORbital DEbris Remover, which would carry over 40 SUL (satellite on umbilical line) de-orbit satellites and propellant sufficient for their removal.
On 7 January 2010, Star, Incorporated reported that it received a contract from the Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command for a feasibility study of the ElectroDynamic Debris Eliminator propellantless spacecraft for space-debris removal. In February 2012 the Swiss Space Center at École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) announced the Clean Space One project, a nanosatellite demonstration project for matching orbit with a defunct Swiss nanosatellite, capturing it and de-orbiting together. The mission has seen several evolutions to reach a pac-man inspired capture model. In 2013, Space Sweeper with Sling-Sat, a grappling satellite which captures and ejects debris was studied. In 2022, a Chinese satellite, SJ-21, grabbed an unused satellite and "threw" it into an orbit with a lower risk for it to collide.
In December 2019, the ESA awarded the first contract to clean up space debris. The €120 million mission dubbed ClearSpace-1 (a spinoff from the EPFL project) is slated to launch in 2026. It aims to remove the 94 kg PROBA-1 satellite from orbit. A "chaser" will grab the junk with four robotic arms and drag it down to Earth's atmosphere where both will burn up.

==== Laser methods ====
The laser broom uses a ground-based laser to ablate the front of the debris, producing a rocket-like thrust that slows and detumbles the object. With continued application, the debris would fall enough to be influenced by atmospheric drag. During the late 1990s, the US Air Force's Project Orion was a laser-broom design. Although a test-bed device was scheduled to launch on a Space Shuttle in 2003, international agreements banning powerful laser testing in orbit limited its use to measurements. The 2003 Space Shuttle Columbia disaster postponed the project and according to Nicholas Johnson, chief scientist and program manager for NASA's Orbital Debris Program Office, "There are lots of little gotchas in the Orion final report. There's a reason why it's been sitting on the shelf for more than a decade."
The momentum of the laser-beam photons could directly impart a thrust on the debris sufficient to move small debris into new orbits out of the way of working satellites. NASA research in 2011 indicates that firing a laser beam at a piece of space junk could impart an impulse of 1 mm (0.039 in) per second, and keeping the laser on the debris for a few hours per day could alter its course by 200 m (660 ft) per day. One drawback is the potential for material degradation; the energy may break up the debris, adding to the problem. A similar proposal places the laser on a satellite in Sun-synchronous orbit, using a pulsed beam to push satellites into lower orbits to accelerate their reentry. A proposal to replace the laser with an Ion Beam Shepherd has been made, and other proposals use a foamy ball of aerogel or a spray of water, inflatable balloons, electrodynamic tethers, electroadhesion, and dedicated anti-satellite weapons.

==== Nets ====
On 28 February 2014, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) launched a test "space net" satellite. The launch was an operational test only. In December 2016 the country sent a space junk collector via Kounotori 6 to the ISS by which JAXA scientists experimented to pull junk out of orbit using a tether. The system failed to extend a 700-meter tether from a space station resupply vehicle that was returning to Earth. On 6 February the mission was declared a failure and leading researcher Koichi Inoue told reporters that they "believe the tether did not get released".
Between 2012 and 2018, the ESA was working on the design of a mission to remove large space debris from orbit using mechanical tentacles or nets. The mission, e.Deorbit, had an objective to remove debris heavier than 4,000 kilograms (8,800 lb) from LEO. Several capture techniques were studied, including a net, a harpoon, and a combination robot arm and clamping mechanism., which also serve as detumbling devices. Funding of the mission was stopped in 2018 in favor of the ClearSpace-1 mission, which is under development.

==== Harpoon ====
The RemoveDEBRIS mission plan is to test the efficacy of several ADR technologies on mock targets in low Earth orbit. In order to complete its planned experiments, the platform is equipped with a net, a harpoon, a laser ranging instrument, a dragsail, and two CubeSats (miniature research satellites). The mission was launched on 2 April 2018.

==== Recycling space debris ====
Metal processing technologies to melt space debris and transform it into other useful form factors are developed by CisLunar Industries. Their system uses electromagnetic heating to melt metal and shape it into metal wire, sheet metal, and metal fuel.

==== Reusing space debris ====

A propulsion system dubbed the Neumann Drive has been developed in Adelaide, South Australia, and first sent into space in June 2023. Metal space junk is converted into fuel rods, which can be plugged into the Neumann Drive, "basically converting the solid metal propellant into plasma". The Drive is intended to be used by American space companies which already carry nets or robotic arms to capture orbital waste. The thruster would enable these satellites to return to Earth with the waste they have collected, allowing it to be melted down to make more fuel.

=== Barriers to dealing with debris ===
With the rapid development of the computer and digitalization industries, more countries and companies have engaged in space activities since the turn of the 21st century. The tragedy of the commons is an economic theory referring to a situation where maximizing self-interest through using a shared resource can lead to the resource degradation shared by all. Based on the theory, individuals' rational action in space will lead to an irrational collective result: orbits crowded with debris. As a common-pool resource, the Earth's orbits, especially LEO and GEO that accommodate most satellites, are nonexcludable and rivalrous.
To address the issue and ensure space sustainability, many technical approaches have been developed. In terms of governance mechanisms, a top-down centralized one is less suitable to tackle the complex debris problem due to the increasing number of space actors. Instead, a polycentric form of governance developed by Elinor Ostrom has been proposed although the promotion of the polycentric network has not been fully developed.

==== Incomplete data of space debris ====
As orbital debris is a global problem affecting both spacefaring and non-spacefaring nations, it is necessary to be handled in a worldwide context. Because of the complexity and dynamics of object movements like spacecraft, debris, meteorites, etc., many countries and regions including the United States, Europe, Russia, and China have developed their space situational awareness (SSA) to avoid potential threats in space or plan actions in advance. To an extent, SSA plays a role in tracking space debris. In order to build a powerful SSA system, there are two prerequisites: international cooperation and exchange of information and data. However, limitations exist in spite of the improving data quality over the past decades. Some space powers are not willing to share the information that they have collected, and those, such as the US, that have shared the data keep parts of it secret. Instead of joining in a coordinated way, a many SSA programs and national databases run parallel to each other with some overlaps, hindering the formation of a collaborative monitoring system.
Some private actors are also trying to establish SSA systems. For example, the Space Data Association (SDA) formed in 2009 is a non-governmental entity. It currently consists of 21 global satellite operators and 4 executive members: Eutelsat, Inmarsat, Intelsat, and SES. SDA is a non-profit platform, aiming to avoid radio interference and space collisions through pooling data from operators independently. Researchers suggest that it is essential to establish an international center for exchanging information on space debris because SSA networks do not completely equal debris tracking systems – the former ones focus more on active and threatening objects in space. In terms of debris populations and defunct satellites, few operators have provided data.
In a polycentric governance network, a resource that cannot be holistically monitored is less likely to be well managed. Both insufficient transnational cooperation and information sharing bring resistance to addressing the debris problem. There is a long way to go to build a global network that covers complete data and has strong interconnection and interoperability.

==== Insufficient participation of private actors ====
With the commercialization of satellites and space, the private sector is getting more interested in space activities. For example, SpaceX is creating a network of around 12,000 small satellites that can transmit high-speed internet to any place in the world. The proportion of commercial spacecraft has increased from 4.6% in the 1980s to 55.6% in the 2010s. Despite the high participation rate of commercial entities, UN COPUOS once deliberately excluded them from having a voice in discussions unless being formally invited by a member state. Ostrom said that the involvement of all relevant stakeholders in the rule-design and implementation process is one of the critical elements of successful governance. The exclusion of private actors largely reduces the effectiveness of the UN committee's role in making collective-choice arrangements that reflect the interests of all space users.
The limited engagement of private actors slows the process of addressing space debris. Ties between dissimilar stakeholders in the governance network offer access to diverse resources. Different competence among stakeholders can help allocate the tasks more reasonably. In that case, the expertise and experience of private operators are critical to help the world achieve space sustainability. The complementary strengths of different stakeholders enable the governance network to be more adaptable to changes and reach common goals more effectively. In recent years, many private actors have seen commercial opportunities for eliminating space debris. It was estimated in 2018 that by 2022 the global market for debris monitoring and removal would generate a revenue of around $2.9 billion. For example, in 2021, Astroscale had contracted with European and Japanese space agencies to develop the capacity of removing orbital debris. Despite that, they are still in small quantity compared to the number of those who have placed satellites in space. Privateer Space, a Hawaiian-based startup company by American engineer Alex Fielding, space environmentalist Moriba Jah, and Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak, announced plans in September 2021 to launch hundreds of satellites into orbit in order to study space debris. However, the company stated it is in "stealth mode" and no such satellites have been launched.
Fortunately, space exploration is not completely driven by competition, and there exists an opportunity for dialogues and cooperation among all stakeholders in both developed and developing countries, to reach an agreement on tackling space debris and assure an equitable and orderly exploration. Besides private actors, network governance does not necessarily exclude the states from playing a role. Instead, the different functions of states might promote the governance process. To improve the polycentric governance network of space debris, researchers suggest: encourage data-sharing among different national and organizational databases at the political level; develop shared standards for data collection systems to improve interoperability; and enhance the participation of private actors through involving them in national and international discussions.

== On other celestial bodies ==

The issue of space debris has been raised as a mitigation challenge for missions around the Moon with the danger of increasing space debris around it.
It is thought that on 4 March 2022, for the first time, human space debris – most likely a spent rocket body, Long March 3C third stage from the 2014 Chang'e 5 T1 mission – unintentionally hit the lunar surface, creating an unexpected double crater.
In 2022, several elements of space debris were found on Mars: Perseverance's backshell was found on the surface of Jezero Crater, and a piece of a thermal blanket which may have come from the descent stage of the rover.
As of February 2024, Mars is littered with about seven tons of human-made debris. Most of it consists of crashed and inactive spacecraft as well as discarded components.

== In popular culture ==
Until the End of the World (1991) is a French sci-fi drama set under the backdrop of an out-of-control Indian nuclear satellite, predicted to re-enter the atmosphere, threatening vast populated areas of the Earth.
Wall-E (2008) features a future Earth that is full of garbage and abandoned by humanity.
As the titular robot leaves the planet and as the humans come back to Earth, they collide with derelict satellites.
In the 2009 Walt Disney Pictures film G-Force, the antagonist, Speckles (voiced by Nicolas Cage) orchestrates a plot to destroy humanity with a massive, planet-wide bombardment of space debris to make the Earth's surface uninhabitable.
Gravity, a 2013 survival film directed by Alfonso Cuaron, is about a disaster on a space mission caused by Kessler syndrome.
In season 1 of Love, Death & Robots (2019), episode 11, "Helping Hand", revolves around an astronaut being struck by a screw from space debris which knocks her off a satellite in orbit.
Manga and anime Planetes tells a story about a crew of Space Debris station that collects and disposes of space debris.
Beside space debris as an issue of science-fiction stories other stories feature it as a reservoir for the story, as in stories about space junk scavengers like Space Sweepers (2021), or as a result or environment of the story.
The episode Conflict from Gerry and Sylvia Anderson's U.F.O. sci-fi TV series shows how small alien spaceships could use terrestrial space debris such as orbital boosters to become undetectable by SHADO's orbital Space Intruder Detector.

== See also ==

== References ==

=== Citations ===

=== Bibliography ===

== Further reading ==

== External links ==

